Title: Efficient murine cardiac phenotyping by combining synchrotron-based phase-contrast micro-CT, histology, immunofluorescence and spatial transcriptomics

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
Title 

Efficient murine cardiac phenotyping by combining synchrotron -based phase -contrast micro -

CT, histology, immunofluorescence and spatial transcriptomics 

Authors 

Niccolò Peruzzi a,b,c , Ayse Ceren Mutgan a,c , Kinga I. Gawlik a, Timothy J. Mead d,e , Tuva 

Jerlhagen Forsgren a,c , Elin Lagervall a,c , Till Dreier b,f , Robin Kr üger b, Elna Lampei a,c , Jenny 

Romell f,g, Rapolas Spalinskas h, Madeleine Durbeej -Hjalt a, Suneel S. Apte i, Martin Bech b,

Anne Bonnin j, Katarina Tiklova h,* , Karin Tran -Lundmark a,c,k,* 

> a

Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden 

> b

Medical Radiation Physics, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden 

> c

Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden 

> d

Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 

USA 

> e

University Hospitals Rainbow Babies and Children’s Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA 

> f

Excillum AB, Stockholm , Sw eden 

> g

Exciscope AB, Stockholm , Sweden 

> h

Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, 

Stockholm, Sweden 

> i

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic Research, Cleveland, OH, USA 

> j

Paul Scherrer Insti tute (PSI), Villigen, Switzerland 

> k

The Pediatric Heart Center, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden 

> *

corresponding authors 

Keywords: congenital heart disease, phenotyping, synchrotron μCT, multimodal imaging, spatial 

transcriptomics, in -situ sequencing 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# 1. Abstract 

Congenital heart disease is commonly studied using genetically modified mouse models, but 

characterization of complex three -dimensional (3D) cardiac anomalies remains technically 

challenging. Histology of fixed paraffin -embedded samples , typically used for structural and 

molecular analysis , is limited to two dimensions (2D) . Synchrotron radiation -based phase -

contrast micro -computed tomography (SRPC -μCT) enables rapid, high -resolution, 3D 

imaging but ha d yet to be fully integrated with molecular tissue analysis . Importantly, SRPC -

μCT is nondestructive and compatible with paraffin -embedded tissue, potentially allowing 

integration with downstream molecular analyses such as multiplexed spatial transcriptomic 

profiling on tissue sections. 

Here, we present a pipeline combining SRPC -μCT with complementary molecular 

approaches for rapid and accurate phenotyping of mouse hearts and for investigating disease 

mechanisms. We demonstrate the successful integration of high -resolution 3D imaging with 

spatial transcriptomics, fluorescen t stainings , and histo chemistry . Notably, all 2D modalities 

were applied sequentially to a single tissue section and registered within the 3D volume. This 

multimodal framework provides a p owerful approach for linking structural and molecular 

information that is broadly applicable across biomedical research. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# 2. Introduction 

Congenital heart disease (CHD) comprises diverse structural birth defects with a wide 

spectrum of functional impact, ofte n deadly, affecting almost 2% of human live births and 

ranking among the top 8 l eading causes of death in children younger than 1 year 1. As such, 

the etiology, mechanisms and management of CHD are subject s of widespread research .

Genetically modified mouse models are routinely used in studies of CHD 2. Cardi ac 

phenotyping in mice is , however , quite challenging because of the small size of a developing 

mouse heart : a typical embryonic day (E) 18.5 mouse heart is just ~3 mm in diameter . The 

most commonly employed technique is histological assessment of formalin -fixed paraffin -

embedded (FFPE) samples, which, however, provides only two -dimensional (2D) 

information and thus might miss important structural defects . Most methods to obtain three -

dimensional (3D) information with sufficient resolution are either time -consuming (e .g. 

histological serial sectioning followed by digital 3D re construction ), require specific sample 

preparation (e .g. light sheet microscopy of cleared tissue ), or cause complete destruction of 

the sample (e .g. high -resolution episcopic microscopy) 3.

In recent years , synchrotron radiation -based (SR) phase -contrast micro -computed 

tomography ( PC -μCT ) has emerged as a powerful tool for 3D assessment of tissue micro -

structure ex vivo . This technique exploits the high coherence of synchrotron light to enhance 

image contrast in tomographic measurements of soft tissue without the need for staining 

agents . The high flux of synchrotron light also allows high -magnification microscopes in the 

detecti on system without having to substantially sacrifice scan speed or image quality . Lastly, 

a significant advantage of PC -μCT over other methods is that it does not require specific 

sample preparation and is no ndestructive . The imaged tissue can therefore be sectioned and 

used for methods such as histology, immuno histochemistry and in situ hybridization for 

comparison and integration with the CT scan 4-6.

SR PC -μCT has successfully been used for imaging hearts from different animal models 

(mice 7-12 , rats 13 -15 , rabbits 14 ), as well as for vis ualizing explanted human heart 16 -18 . While 

several of these studies have shown the potential of SR PC -μCT to provide morphological 

assessment of cardiac defects, the more recent focus has been on the cardiac micro -structure, 

exploiting the high resolution (< 1 μm) that can be achieved with SR PC -μCT . Because high 

resolution necessarily compromises the field -of -view (FoV) of a single scan , in most of these 

publications scans of large hearts have been achieved by acquiring multiple sub -volumes and 

digitally stitching them together. As a culmination of this approach , whole human adult 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

heart s ha ve recently been scanned with 20 μm voxel size , with a few selected areas imaged 

with as low voxel size as 2.2 6 μm 19,20 . While the option to achieve μm -resolution in whole 

large organs is a significant advantage of SR PC -μCT compare d to other microscopy methods, 

it also results in very long scan times ( the two human adult heart scan s in 20 are reported to 

have required ~7 h each for the whole organ scans, plus ~2 h for each of the higher resolution 

areas ); combined with the low availability of synchrotron beam time, this use seems for now 

restricted to the creation of high quality atlases, or to studies with a limited number of 

samples . In the case of mouse fetal hearts, however, a single E18.5 heart can fit within the 

FoV of the ~ 2 μm resolution configuration of most PC -μCT synchrotron beamlines; as such, 

a full scan could require only a few minutes without com promising on quality. The small size 

of mouse hearts would also be optimal when trying to perform PC -μCT of unstained samples 

in a laboratory setting, a method which has recently seen steady developments 21 -23 . Even 

though scan times with laboratory scanners are longer, easier accessibility comp ared to 

synchrotrons could lead to a wider implementation of PC -μCT into phenotyping routines, still 

retaining at the same time full compatibility with other methods such as traditional histo logy .

While a significant part of this paper is dedicated to PC -μCT performed at synchrotron s,

where large batches of samples could in principle be scanned in a very short time 24 , some 

results from laboratory -based (LB) scanners, a custom made one and a commercial scanner 

capable of performing PC -μCT, will also be shown and discussed as a potential , more 

accessible, alternative. 

Although some studies have hinted at how PC -μCT does not impair subsequent histological 

and molecular evaluation of the hearts, most existing papers have limited themselves to 

show ing views of comparable areas, but have not precisely registered slices from the different 

techniques . Neverth eless, methods to achieve a 1 -to -1 match have been already proved in 

literature for other types of tissue 5,25 -29 . A precise alignment of different modalities would 

provide structural context to the 2D observations enabled by histolog y and could furthermore 

serve as a basis for machine learning or deep learning approaches in the future. 

In this work, we present how PC -μCT can enable an accurate and fast phenotyping of fetal 

mouse hearts, and how an analysis pipeline could take form, with a particular focus on 

communication in multidisciplinary teams and on full integration of methods directed at 

understanding the molecular mec hanisms behind different types of congenital heart disease .

Methods for analysis of FFPE tissue ha ve developed extremely fast over the last couple of 

years . It is now possible to study 5000 mRNAs at the same time in a single tissue section 

using in situ sequencing (ISS) with padlock probes and rolling -circle amplification 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(Xenium®). This allows targeted transcriptional profiling of RNA directly within tissue 

sections while preserving cellular spatial organization . To our knowledge, our study is the 

first to fully integrate spatial transcriptomics with SRPC -μCT . In addition, we explored the 

possibility to use the same tissue section for histology and immunofluorescence following 

ISS. 

# 3. Results 

In this section we present the results obtained at different stage s of our analysis pipeline. The 

analysis was performed with a combination of different functions in the software programs 

FIJI 30 and Amira (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US). Parts of the 

pipeline are described in this section as necessary ; more details are provid ed in the Methods 

section .

As a first step, we show how morphological information about the hearts can be extracted 

directly from the SR PC -μCT scans. Subsequently, we present an example in which we used 

this morphological i nformation for cardiac phenotyping of an Adamts 6-deficient mouse 

st rain . We then introduce a pipeline for integration of 2D histological slides into 3D PC -μCT 

volumes and show how we used it to successfully combine SR PC -μCT with histochemical 

staining , fluorescen t stainings , and spatial transcriptomics. The final section present s results 

from laboratory -based μCT systems and offer s a qualitative comparison between them and 

the synchrotron results. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3.1.  Morphology 

A first assessment of the SR PC -μCT data consisted in scrolling through the volumes with 

orthogonal slices (Figure 1-A) . A preliminary 3D visualization, without the need of any 

additional pre -processing, was also performed using a semi -transparent volume rendering 

(Figure 1-B); by adjusting transparency based on the image grayscale, the organs were 

visualized as distinct from the paraffin embedding in just a few seconds. This coarse 

visualization, together with the use of orthogonal slices , was employed to rapidly assess 

sample and image quality and to inform the subsequent physical sectioning of the samples 

(i.e. anticipating how the heart would be positioned while cutting through the block and 

deciding at rough ly which depth slices should be extracted for staining ). 

Figure 1 – Overview of cardiac morphology assessment from SRPC -μCT data at increasing levels of 

complexity (and proportionately, time) in data segmentation. A – An immediate evaluation consists in 

digitally re -slicing the volume along arbitrary directions. Multiple slicing planes can be combined. B

– A semi -transparent volume rendering can be directly applied to the data without any preprocessing. 

The overall structure of the heart is visible, but morphological details are hidden by the pericardium 

and other organs. C – After segmentation of the heart and removal of the pericardium, the heart 

structure is readily visible with a volume rendering. RA: right atrium, LA: left atrium, RV: right 

ventricle, LV: left ventricle. The rendering is in a cubic box with 4 -mm-long sides, on two faces of 

which the segmented dataset is projected, to more easily visualize the heart size. D – The coronary 

circulation is segmented and shown as a red mesh surface rendering, together with a transparent mesh 

surface view of the heart to provide positional context. Video -clip 1 illustrates the transition between 

the different visualization options. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

As a next step of the analysis, the hearts were segmented from the rest of the tissue. 

The resulting cleaned segmentation s allowed creation of 3D rendering s of the heart s (Figure 

1-C) that were used as a basis for all the other visualizations. 

As a further example of what could be achieved from these datasets, a semi -automatic 

segmentation of the coronary circulation was performed . A mesh surface rendering of the 

coronary circulation is shown in red in  Figure 1-D, together with a transparent mesh surface 

view of the hea rt to provide positional context. 

A showcase of the different visualization options is provided in Video -clip 1. 

The 3D volume can be digitally sectioned along any arbitrary plane. While this can be 

performed immediately, without any segmentation, a volume rendering often aids in 

positioning the slices and provides a more immediate understanding of the 3D context . To 

facilitate evaluation by specialists with a medical backgro und , standard echocardiography 

views can be digitally recreated. An example of this is provided in  Figure 2, where the left 

parasternal long -axis views , commonly emplo yed in echocardiography 31 , were recreated on 

Figure 2 – Standard echocardiography views can be digitally recreated to assist in evaluation . Here, l eft 

parasternal long -axis views ( as described in Lai et al. ) were created from the PC -μCT d ata. RA: right atrium, 

LA: left atrium, RV: right ventricle, LV: left ventricle , Ao: aorta, PA: pulmonary artery. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the PC -μCT data ( Figure 2). Using the volume rendering shown in  Figure 1-C as a reference 

(here colored in pink , to distinguish it from the grayscale slices), digital slices in the Amira 

3D environment could be positioned to mimic a sweep from an echocardiography transducer .

Slices matching the three different views are shown with a yellow border; the volume 

rendering can also be c ut in correspondence of these slices to extract thin 3D slabs, as shown 

right below. 

3.1.  Potential for phenotyping 

The structural information provided b y PC -μCT can be used for fast and precise phenotyping. 

As an example , Figure 3 illustrates the case of an Adamts 6-deficient mouse strain. Adamts6 -

deficient mice have pre viously been demonstrated to develop cardiac defects and other 

congenital anomalies 32 -34 . With PC -μCT, apical 5 -chamber view s of wil d-type ( Figure 3-A)

and mutant (Figure 3-C) hearts were readily obtained and compared. In  Figure 3, volume 

renderings similar to the ones show n in Figure 1-C and 2 -B are used. For additional clarity, 

Figure 3 – Example of application of PC -μCT to cardiac phenotyping. A – Volume rendering of a wild -type 

E18.5 mouse heart, digitally cropped to show a 5 -chamber view. The luminal volumes of the cardiac chambers 

are color -coded to distinguish laterality, right -side d in blue and left -side d in red . B – Schematic drawings of a 

wild -type heart and of the defect observed in the mutant heart. C – Volume rendering of the heart of an 

Adamts6 -deficient E18.5 mouse , in a view matching the wild -type in A. Between right and lef t side, a 

ventricular septal defect is clearly visible (in purple). D – Close -up view of the ventricular septal defect in C, 

with an additional part of the rendering extended in the vertical direction, to show the pulmonary artery as well. 

The overriding o f the aorta defines a double outlet right ventricle type of defect (DORV). RV: right ventricle, 

LV: left ventricle, Ao: aorta, AoV: aortic valve, PA: pulmonary artery, PV: pulmonary valve. E – As in D, but 

adding semi -transparent surface mesh renderings of part of the luminal volumes, to better show right ventricular 

outflow tract (RVOT), left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) and septal defect connection. A dashed line is 

added to the middle of the septum, confirming the overriding aorta. F – As in E, but f rom a different view that 

better shows the septum and the overriding. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the luminal volumes of the cardiac chambers were also segmented from the 3D volumes and 

color -coded to distinguish laterality, with right -sided structures shown in blue and left -sided 

structures in red. In the case of the Adamts6 -deficient mouse strain, a ventricular septal defect 

is recognizable (color -coded in purple for clarity) . Figure 3-B shows a schematic of the defect 

being observed .

While the ventricular septal defect is visible already from the sectioning plane in  Figure 3-C, 

by leveraging the volumetric information provided by PC -μCT (Figure 3-D-E-F) it is 

po ssible to observe that both aorta and pulmonary artery arise predominantly from the right 

ventricle, defining a double out let right ventricle type of defect. In  Figure 3-D, a close -up of 

Figure 3-C shows the ventricular septal defect , with aorta and aortic valve above it ; t he 

volume rendering is also extended in the vertical direction, to show pulmonary artery and 

pulmonary valve . In  Figure 3-E, the right ventric ular outflow tract is added as a semi -

transparent mesh surface rendering , to clarify the opening of the right ventricle . The septum 

is also indicated with a dashed line, t o strengthen the argument of the defect being a double 

outlet right ventricle . Figure 3-F offers a different view. Contrasting with histologic al 

assessment from a sing le section, which was limited by the choice of initial block orientation, 

the present analysis eliminated ambiguity of detection and enabled precise delineation of this 

complex defect. 

3.2. Integration of histology and fluorescent staining with PC -μCT 

After PC -μCT, the paraffin -embedded samples were sectioned and stained. The histology and 

fluorescen t staining images were then integrated back into the CT data. 

In between the performing of PC -μCT and the scanning of the histological sections, the 

section s undergo a series of transformations (sectioning, de -paraffinization, re -hydration, 

staining, de -hydration) that inevitably deform the tissue. In order to register (i.e. digitally 

combine) the two different datasets with high precision, a data processing pipeline consisting 

of multiple steps was developed . The pipeline is summarized in  Figure 4 and described in 

detail in the Methods section. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

An example of the result for hematoxylin and eosin ( H&E ) staining is provided in  Figure 5,

in which three H&E -stained sections were identified in the PC -μCT scan presented in  Figure 

Figure 4 – Schematic overview of the data registration pipeline used in this work. The input data, histological 

section and x -ray μCT stack, are shown with a cyan background. From top to bottom, the pipeline is then 

formed by three main s teps (gray background). Step I is a grayscale conversion of the histology data, while 

trying to match the feature contrast provided by the x -rays; to this end, one channel from the RGB (red, blue, 

green) or HSB (hue, saturation, brightness) color decomposi tion is typically used, depending on the staining. 

The grayscale histology and the μCT stack are then loaded in Amira (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for step II , a 

2D -to -3D affine registration. This procedure is semi -automatic, requiring a first coarse manual positioning of 

the histology into the μCT volume, followed by an automatic refinement using a normalized mutual information 

score. At this point of the pipeline, the match between histology and PC -μCT typically looks acceptable at low 

magnification but is far from a 1 -to -1 match when evaluated at a zoomed -in level. This is due to local 

deformations of the tissue, which cannot be fixed with the global transformations performed so far. This is 

addressed in step III , where the identified matching slice in the μCT volume is upscaled to the histology 

resolution and the two 2D images are then processed for 2D -to -2D elastic registration using the bUnwarp plugin 

in FIJI. The plugin is fully automatic and performs local elastic registration using b -splines estimated on grids of 

progressively smaller size. The green (histology) and red (μCT) overlapping images show the improvement 

introduced by step III compared to only step II. A map of the estimated deformations (hue shows the direction, 

saturation the relative inten sity) is included to show the highly localized character of these changes. All the 

mathematical transformations applied to the grayscale -converted histology images can finally be applied to the 

original images, which can then be loaded in Amira to produce the other figures in this section. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

1. H ere they are shown combined with a volume rendering with carved corner ( Figure 5-A) 

or with mesh sur face renderings of heart and coronary circulation ( Figure 5-B, with inset 

showing the good match between histology and segmentation of the coronaries). A direct 

compar ison between the same sli ce in SR PC -μCT and histology after the registration pipeline 

is provided in  Figure 5-C and -D, respectively. 

Th e registration pipeline was also tested with fluorescent staining (FS) data ; t he results are 

exemplified in  Figure 6. Figure 6-A show s how the semilunar valves ( arrows) with 

connect ions to the aorta and the main pulmonary artery could be visualized with a 

combination of PC -μCT slices and volume rendering (in pink, to more easily distinguish it 

from the grayscale 2D slices) . In  Figure 6-B, a tissue section stained with 

immunofluorescence for α-actin , to visualize smooth muscle cells, and DAPI for cell nuclei, 

has been integrated with in the volume . T he smooth muscle cells in the walls of the great 

arteries ( aorta and pulmonary artery ), as well as in a coronary artery (arrow) are clearly 

positive for α-actin , while DAPI provides a n overview of tissue cellularity . Figure 6-C shows 

only the slices, without the rendering, to make the α -actin in the arterial walls more visible 

and also highlight how volumetric information is important to correctly understand the 

Figure 5 – Integration of standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining with PC -μCT. A – Three different 

H&E -stained sections are integrated into the volume segmented in Figure 1. A corner of the volume rendering is 

carved to show more of the H&E -stained section s. B – Using the surface renderings of Figure 1 -D, the match 

between histology and μCT is evident down to the registration of coronary arteries (inset). C – The SRPC -μCT 

digital slice matching one of the histology images. D – The H&E image matching C. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

morphology.  Figure 6-D, -E, -F combine a volume rendering based on the PC -μCT data with 

FS for hyaluronan binding protein , which was loca lized in to valve leaflets as expected . In E

and F, to better show this localization, the pulmonary valve and trunk were added as a semi -

transparent mesh surface rendering .

3.3. Integration of spatial transcriptomics with PC -μCT 

The same pipeline was successfully applied t o spatial transcriptomics data (X enium platform) 

as well , the results of which are shown in  Figure 7.

In  Figure 7-A, four transcripts , of genes known for distinct roles and spatial localization in 

the heart 35,36 , were selected from among the 5000 total genes in the Xenium data and 

displayed in four distinc t colors, on top of DAPI (in blue) . Troponin I -interacting kinase 

(Tnni3k , in red) regulates cardiomyocyte growth, contractility and conduction system 

development, and was localized prevalently in the myocardium; Wilms tumor 1 (W t1, in 

Figure 6 – Integration of molecular staining with PC -μCT. A – Different μCT slicing planes (grayscale), 

combined with a volume rendering (in pink, to clearly separate it from the slicing planes), can be used to 

identify several morphologi cal features, such as the semilunar valves (arrowheads) connecting to aorta (Ao) and 

pulmonary artery (PA), and the mitral valve (asterisks). RA: right atrium, LVOT: left ventricular outflow tract. 

B – An immunofluorescence section stained for α-actin (in red), to visualize smooth muscle cells, and DAPI (in 

blue), for cell nuclei, is integrated into the volume. The walls of Ao, PA, and of a coronary artery (arrowhead) 

are clearly positive for α -actin. C – The volume rendering is removed to make the α -actin in the Ao more 

visible, and to show the importance of the volumetric information to correctly understand the morphology. D –

Different view of the same heart (now rendering in grayscale, since no slicing planes are used), combined with a 

section stained fo r hyaluronan (in cyan) and DAPI. Hyaluronan is highly localized in the valve leaflets, as 

expected. Several morphological features are recognizable, like the ductus arteriosus (DA) and the branching of 

the pulmonary artery (asterisks). LA: left atrium. E – Like D, but adding the pulmonary valve and trunk as semi -

transparent mesh surface rendering and adjusting the cropping of the volume rendering. F – Like E, different 

point of view (view coming from the DA inside the PA), to highlight the registration betw een the datasets. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

yellow) is essential for epicardium formation and was predominantly localized there ;

Forkhead box C1 (Foxc 1, in purple) is involved in cardiac morphogenesis, and was 

previously reported to be expressed mainly in the endocardium , which was confirmed here ;

Hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein 1 (Hapln 1, in green) supports structural integrity of 

the extracellular matrix . As expected, based on previous publications and our FS with 

hyaluronan binding protein shown in  Figure 6, Hapln1 expression was mainly seen in cardiac 

valves (as well as in tracheal cartilage). 

Figure 7 – Integration of in situ sequencing (ISS) data with PC -μCT. A – From the ISS data (Xenium 

platform), four genes with distinct role and spatial localization in the heart were selected and displayed on top 

of DAPI (blue). The genes are: Tnni3k (red), localized in the myocardium; Wt1 (yellow), in the epicardium; 

Foxc1 (purple), in the endocardium; Hapln1 (green), in the valves and cartilage. B – The ISS slice is 

overlapped to the matching PC -μCT volume rendering. Morphological information, such as the papillary 

muscles (arrowhead) connecting to the mitral valve, are rea dily visible. C – Combining rendering and off -

plane digital sections provides greater structural context. RV: right ventricle, LV: left ventricle, RVOT: right 

ventricular outflow tract, AoV: aortic valve, PV: pulmonary valve, MV: mitral valve. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In  Figure 7-B, spatial transcriptomics data is combined with the matching volume rendering 

obtained from PC -μCT , providing 3D context. As an example, the mitral valve papillary 

muscles are clearly identi fiable (arrowhead) , connecting to the leaflets . Figure 7-C also adds 

to the rendering virtual slices out of the spatial transcriptomics plane, showing the position of 

the pulmonary valve and the right ventri cular outflow tract. 

After spatial transcriptomics, the section was also stained with FS for CD31 (to label 

endothelial cells ) and for hyaluronan . It was then stained with H&E as well . All these results 

were registered to the PC -μCT data with the same pipeline . Figure 8 shows how PC -μCT, 

spatial transcriptomics, FS and H&E data can all be combined in the same view. He re, t he 

visualized in situ sequencing ( ISS ) data correspond s to one cell cluster, associated to a

valvular subpopulation of extracellular -matrix -producing fibroblasts (in green, on top of 

DAPI in blue). In addition to the cluster, two selected transcripts associated with hyaluronan ,

hy aluronan synthase 2 ( Has 2) and Hapln 1, are explicitly shown (in pink and yellow 

respectively) . As expected, t hey are clearly localized to the leaflets of th e aortic and mitral 

valve s, just like the hyaluronan FS (in cyan ). FS for CD31, to visualize endothelial cells, is 

shown in red. 

Video -clip 2 illustrates how these combined views were created and provides a better spatial 

understanding. 

Figure 8 – Integration of PC -μCT with standard histology, fluorescent staining (FS) and spatial transcriptomics 

(in situ sequencing, ISS). A – The ISS slice shown in Figure 7 was subsequently stained with FS for DAPI (in 

blue), hyaluronan (in cyan) and CD31 (in red), and later re -stained with H&E. All the images were registered 

together and are shown in separate quadrants, overlapped to the co rresponding PC -μCT volume rendering (tinted 

in pink to distinguish it from the virtual slices) and combined with virtual slices to provide additional volumetric 

context. The ISS data here shown correspond to a single cell cluster, associated to a valvular subpopulation of 

extracellular -matrix -producing fibroblasts (in green, on top of DAPI in blue). From this cluster, two selected 

transcripts associated to hyaluronan ( Has2 and Hapln1 ) are explicitly shown (in pink and yellow respectively). In 

the H&E quadra nt, FS for CD31 is also overlapped, to visualize the endothelial cells. B – Close -up view on the 

aortic valve (AoV) and the mitral valve (MV), showing smaller details of the FS and ISS data. The selected ISS 

cluster, and the two selected transcripts associ ated to hyaluronan, are highly localized in the valve leaflets, just 

like the hyaluronan FS in cyan, as expected. Video -clip 2 illustrates how these combined views were created. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3.4.  Lab oratory -based  PC -μCT 

After SR PC -μCT, one sample was also imaged on two LBPC -μCT scanners , a commercial 

one ( Exciscope Polaris ) and a high -resolution custom -made one 37 .

Prior to the scans, excess paraffin was manually removed from around the sample with a 

scalpel, as detailed in the Methods section. 

The commercial system was used in a configuration which provide d a pixel size somewhat 

comparable to the synchrotron data (2.46 μm vs 1.63 μm) . Five different total scan times 

were tested, from 5 minutes (to directly compare with the synchrotro n results) to 8 hours. The 

results are summarized in Figure 9. 

In the figure, all the datasets have been registered to each other, and a region of interest 

matching the field -of -view of the SRPC -μCT scan has been extracted f rom the LBPC -μCT 

data. The field -of -view provided by the lab oratory setup was significantly larger than shown 

(approximately t wice as large in each direction, owing to a larger detector size compared to 

the synchrotron setup ). Most of this was unused for the heart scan, but it would allow for the 

scanning of larger samples without having to compromise the effective pixel size. An image 

of the full field -of -view is provided in Figure S1, Supplemental Material. 

From a qualitative evaluation of Figure 9, it is apparent that, if only the larger structure of the 

heart is of interest, for example to identify ventricular septal defects as in Figure 3 , a 2-hours -

long LBPC -μCT scan might be sufficient . Even 1 hour or 30 min utes might be acceptable ,

depending on the size of the defect and on the noise requirements for the segmentation .

Smaller details , like the coronary circulation , would require longer scan times, as shown in 

the insets , which correspond to magnified views of the dashed region -of -interest in the scans. 

Two arrowheads point to a larger coronary vessel (on the right) and a smaller one (on the 

left) ; the arrowheads are color -coded, with green indicating that the coronary ves sel is visible, 

and r ed meaning that the details of the coronary vessel start being lost. 

Details that are even smaller than the coronar y vessels , such as individu al cardio myocytes, 

which are distinguishable in the SRPC -μCT dataset, are below the resolutio n limit of the 

LBPC -μCT system. While not strictly essential for the applications described in this work ,

they would be crucial for studies in which cardiomyocyte orientation, extracted for example 

with structure tensor analysis 12,15 , would be of interest. Higher resolution could in theory also 

improve registration accuracy , by providing more detailed information about the underlying 

structures, thereby better constraining the alignment between datasets. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The custom -made laboratory scanner provided similar results to the comme rcial one (shown 

in Figure S2, Supplemental Material). This system was initially included because of its 

potential to reach even higher resolutions (< 1 μm) 37 , but the relatively large sample size, 

especially due to the paraffin still surrounding the heart , impaired the available magnification. 

Nevertheless, i t still managed to achieve results comparable to the commercial scanner when 

used with lower magnification settings .

# 4. Discussion 

This paper, to our knowledge, shows for the first time how high -resolution 3D imaging , in the 

form of S RPC -μCT, could be successfully combined with ISS -based spatial transcriptomics ,

fluorescen t staining and conventional histology . A ll 2D methods integrated into the CT 

volume could be performed sequentially on a single tissue slice. The methodological pipel ine 

is described in detail , and this multimodal approach will be of great value not only for 

Figure 9 – Qualitative comparison between a 5 -minutes -long SRPC -μCT scan (panel A) and LBPC -μCT scans 

with different total scan times (8 hours, 2 hours, 1 hour, 30 minutes and 5 minutes in panels B-to -F respectively) 

performed on a commercial system (Exciscope). The field -of -view of the LB systems is cropped to the one of 

the SR data ( full field -of -view is shown in Supplemental Material). In each figure, the inset in the bottom left 

corner is a magnified view of the same region of interest (dashed outline). In the inset, arrowheads point to 

coronary arteries of different size. The arrow heads are color -coded to indicate in which scan they can be seen 

(green) or when they start to be lost (red). Scalebar in the inset: 100 μm. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

efficient murine cardiac phenotyping, but also for combining structural and molecular 

information in many different fields of research. 

Rapid and accurate pheno typing of mutant mouse strains will be of value not only for the 

research groups who now use more time consuming or destructive methods , bu t also has 

potential to red uce the number of animals needed for confirming a phenotype, in agreement 

with the 3R prin ciple to replace, reduce and refine t he use of animals for research 38 (as cited 

in 39 ).

The possibility to virtually section the tissue in standard echocardiography views 31 will 

facilitate communication with physicians working clinically with congenital heart disease ,

who may be unfamiliar with PC -μCT . For this study , the work to find the correct imaging 

planes was done manuall y by adjusting the slicing plane s in Amira. However, one could 

envision a future method whe re landmarks are added to certain points of interest, such as 

features within the valves and the apex, through which the virtual imaging planes could be 

automaticall y fit ted . Such landmarks could also potentially be used to train artificial 

intelligence (AI) or machine learning approaches aimed at fully or partially automated 

cardiac phenotyping in the future .

Importantly, n o specific adjustments of the protocols previously used for preparation of 

heart s or for SRPC -μCT were needed for this project. Standard tissue fixation and paraffin 

embedding were used, taking care to remove as much blood as possible t o make 

segmentation easier , combined with careful avoidance of air bubbles in the paraffin blocks to 

ensure optimal image quality . Before performing the Xenium experiment, a comparison of 

RNA quality 40 was made using sections from a hear t which had not been imaged with X -

rays , and sections from a heart imaged twice with standard protocols for SRPC -μCT (at the 

ANATOMIX beamline 41 of the SOLEIL synchrotron in Paris , F rance, and at the DanMAX 

beamline 42 of the MAX IV synchrotron in Lund , Sweden ) and once at a laboratory -based 

micro -CT scanner (Exciscope Polaris ) at the Technical University of Denmark in 

Copenhagen (DTU), also using standard protocol imaging for this type of soft tissue. No 

obvious diffe rences in detection of common RNAs were observed between the two hearts, 

indicating that standard protocols for tissue processing and μCT can be used when planning 

for subsequent ISS. This confirms previous findings regarding preserved RNA integrity 

following SRPC -μCT 4.

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The laboratory scans showed that, if measurement speed is not a concern, laboratory -based 

solutions could be a more accessible alternative to synchrotrons , depending on t he length -

scale of the features of interest . The longest tested scan time on the commercial scanner could 

resolve microanatomical features as small as coronary vessels with a cross -section of ~10 

μm , although these were quickly lost with shorter scan time s. If larger defects are of interest, 

we showed how scan times down to 1 hour or possibly even 30 minutes per sample could still 

provide satisfactory results. It is important to mention that the comparison was not entirely 

fair, as the synchrotron scan was performed with the heart embedded in a standard paraffin 

block with a size of roughly 3 x 2 x 1 cm 3, while prior to the laboratory scans the block was 

carved into a ~1 -cm -diameter cylinder centered around the heart, removing the excess 

paraffin. If the sa mple had been processed in a similar way, we could have expected even 

shorter scan times at the synchrotron, as well as a probable reduction of ring artefacts and 

local tomography artefacts. Nevertheless, laboratory scann ers show great potential if they can 

be accompanied by an ad -hoc standardization of the embedding protocols. This was even 

more relevant for the custom made high -resolution system, which here showed similar 

performance to the commercial scanner but could in principle offer even higher res olution if 

more paraffin could be removed from around the sample. 

Having a 3D visualization of a tissue sample prior to sectioning is useful for selecting regions 

of interest for subsequent multimodal analysis . Imag ing the tissue already embedded in a 

cas sette which will fit the microtome used for sectioning , in addition to keeping the block as 

horizontal as possible whi le performing the CT, is particularly helpful. There will always be 

tissue distortion when re -hydration and de -hyd ration of tissue is perf ormed, but it is 

preferable if tissue movement and/or detachment can be minimized by handling the tissue 

with care , due to the limit to how much distortion the pipeline can compensate. 

A single tissue section was used to combine the different methods and we show only one of 

many cell cluster s combined with transcripts actively expressed in this specific cluster to 

illustrate the visualization possibi lities . However, we have previously develop ed virtual 

histological staining (Elastin van Gieson and H&E) by using serial sectioning and staining of 

every 10 th section for generative adversarial network training purposes (manuscript currently 

in second round of revision in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface) . A similar approach 

could possibly be used for AI -assisted identification of cell clusters within CT volumes. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In summary, this study shows how high -resolution 3D imaging (SRPC -μCT) was 

successfully combined with spatial transcriptomics, fluorescent staining and conventional 

histology on a single tissu e slice. The approach described herein has the potential to be a 

useful proof -of -concept guide for additional studies that will encompass a multidisciplinary, 

multimodal approach. 

# 5. Methods 

5.1.  Ethics statement 

The samples were obtained from Lund, Sweden and Cleveland, Ohio, USA. 

All animal experiments from Sweden were approved by the Malmö/Lund (Sweden) Ethical 

Committee for Animal Research (ethical permit numbers M173 –19 and M2780 –24), in 

accordance with guidelines from the Swedish Board o f Agriculture. All experiments were 

performed in line with the laws and regulations issued by the Swedish Board of Agriculture. 

Experiments involving live animals were reported according to the ARRIVE guidelines. 

The animal experiments obtained from the US A were approved by the Cleveland Clinic 

Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol 2018 –2450). 

5.2.  Tissue  preparation 

The hearts shown in Figures 1 -2-5-6-9 were healthy control embryonic hearts imaged for a 

phenotyping study of laminin γ1 conditiona l knockout mice 11 . Animals were maintained at 

the Biomedical Center animal facility (Lund, Sweden), where routine pathogen surveillance 

was performed. Genotyping was carried out according to Jackson Laboratory protocols. 

Timed matings were establishe d to obtain embryos for analysis. Pregnant females were 

sacrificed at day 18.5 of embryo gestation and embryos were collected. Embryos were 

decapitated and positioned supine for fixation, and a tail sample was collected for 

genotyping. The peritoneal cavit y was opened by a midline incision extending to the trachea. 

The trachea was perforated using a blunt G30 needle and lungs were inflated with 

Histochoice (Sigma). The heart –lung complex was then isolated and fixed in Histochoice 

overnight at 4°C. 

Histochoice -fixed tissues were dehydrated and paraffin embedded. Samples were transferred 

to PBS overnight at 4°C and then sequentially through 45%, 70%, 95%, and 100% ethanol 

followed by xylene (approximately 1 h per step at room temperature). Tissues wer e then 

incubated in paraffin at 60°C (two changes, 1.5 h each) and embedded. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The hearts presented in Figures 3 -7-8 were from E16.5 wild -type and from an Adamts 6-

deficient strain. Adamts6 mutant mice were previously described 32,33 and maintained on a 

C57BL/6 J background . Age -matched wild -type C57BL/6 embryos were used as controls. 

Mouse embryos were generated by controlled matings, using the observation of a vaginal 

mucus plug to designate E0.5. The hearts were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde , processed and 

embedded in paraffin. 

5.3. Synchrotron -based phase -contrast μCT 

The samples presente d in Figures 1 -6 and Figure 9 were scanned with SRPC -μCT at the 

X02DA TOMCAT beamline 43 of the Swiss Lig ht Source (SLS, Paul Scherrer Institut e,

Villigen, Switzerland). 

PC -μCT was performed using the free space propagation method, which does not require any 

additional equipment aside from a coherent X-ray source and a detecting system placed at a 

specific p ropagation distance . The X -ray beam, produced by a 2.9 T super -bending magnet 

inserted in the 2.4 GeV storage ring, was monochromatized to an energy of 21 keV by using 

a double -multilayer monochromator. The detecting system consisted in a 20 -μm -thick 

LuAG: Ce scintillator coupled to a 4X magnifying objective (Optic Peter) and a PCO Edge 

sCMOS detector, resulting in a field -of -view of 4.2 x 3.5 mm 2 with an effective pixel size of 

1.63 x 1.63 μm 2. The sample was placed on a rotating stage in -between source and detector, 

with a sample -to -detector propagation distance of 19 cm. The acquisition time was set to 80 

ms per projection, for a total exposure time of about 2.4 min for a full scan (180° rotation) 

with 1801 projections . Including 100 flat images and 30 darks, plus motor overhead, the total 

scan time was about 4.3 min. 

Following acquisition, the projections were processed for phase retrieval using Paganin’s 

method 44 (δ = 3.7e -8, β =1.7e -10). Tomographic reconstruction was then performed using 

the gridrec algorithm 45 . The obtained data were digital volumes of 2560 x 2560 x 2160 

pixels (corresponding to a physical volume of 4.2 x 4.2 x 3.5 mm 3), with a 16 -bit pixel depth. 

The sample used for Figures 7-8 was imaged at the ANATOMIX beamline 41 of the SOLEIL 

synchrotron. The x -rays were produced by an U18 cryogenic in -vacuum undulator , which 

was set to a gap of 5.5 mm. The beam was filtered to a pink beam using a combination of 

filters (26 um Au, 0.1 mm Cu) that corresponded to a mean energy of approximately 30 keV 

(25 keV peak). The detecting system consisted in a 20 -μm -thick LuAG :Ce scintillator 

coupled to a 5X magnifying objectiv e ( Mitutoyo ) and an ORCA Flash 4.0 V2 sCMOS 

detector (Hamamatsu), for an effective pixel size of 1.3 μm and a 2.7 x 2.7 mm 2 field -of -

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

view. The sample -to -detector distance was set to 20 cm. A full scan (180 ° rotation ) consisted 

of 2000 projections with a 100 ms acquisition time each, for a total exposure time of about 

3.3 min. Considering flat and dark images, and motor overhead, the total scan time was 

around 5 min. 

Following acquisition, the data reconstruction pipe line was performed using the beamline 

routines, based on PyHST2 46 . T he phase information was retrieved with Paganin’s method 44 

(with a Paganin le ngth of 130 μm ; this parameter is described in the PyHST2 documentation  

> 47

and for a 30 -keV mean photon energy and a 20 -cm sample -to -detector distance 

corresponds to a δ/β of around 650 ). An unsharp mask (filter length 2, filter coefficient 0.3) 

was also applied to reduce the excessive smoothing introduced by the phase retrieval method. 

Ring removal was performed using the default ring correction in PyHST2, described in 46 and 

named “double flat field correction ” in the PyHST2 documentation 47 . The volumes were 

then reconstructed using filtered back projection. The obtained data were digital volumes of 

2048 x 2048 x 2048 pixels (c orresponding to a physical volume of 2.7 x 2.7 x 2.7 mm 3), with 

a 16 -bit pixel depth. 

5.4.  Laboratory -based μCT 

After SRPC -μCT, on e of the samples scanned at TOMCAT was imaged with two different 

laboratory setups . Before performing LB PC -μCT, excess paraffin was manually removed 

from around the sample with a scalpel, obtaining a paraffin cylinder of approximately 1 cm 

diameter with the sample roughly in the center. Th is step was quite important for the 

laboratory setups , both for time concerns (less paraffin abso rbing the X-rays means shorter 

scan times) and for geometrical requirements of the custom -made laboratory setup (in which, 

to achieve higher geometrical magnification, it was necessary to position the sample as close 

to the source as possible). 

The first s ystem was a version of the commercial scanner Exciscope Polaris, equipped with 

an Excillum MetalJet D2+ 70 kV source (with the I1 target alloy) and a Photonic Science 

Gsense XL CMOS camera (4096 x 4096 pixels, 13.1 μm pixel size). The source was run at 

187 W of power (average energy 17 keV) , with an e -beam spot size of 10 x 60 μm 2. The 

scanning geometry was set to have a 150 mm source -to -object distance and an 800 mm 

source -to -detector distance, resulting in a 5.3x cone -beam magnification, corresponding to an 

effective pixel size of 2.46 μm and an effective propagation distance of 122 mm. A total of 

3601 projections were acquired, uniformly covering a 360° rotation of the sample. Five 

different scans were performed, with different exposure times per projecti on ( 0.083 s, 0.5 s, 1 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

s, 2 s and 8 s ). This resulted in total scan times ranging from 5 min (comparable to the SRPC -

μCT one) to 8 h. The acquired images were processed for artefact reduction (Exciscope 

proprietary algorithm) , p hase retrieval (using Paganin ’s method 44 ) and t omographic 

reconstruction (filtered back projection for cone -beam geometry using the commercial 

software MITOS) .

The second system was a custom -made setup 37 comprising an Excillum NanoTube N2 60 kV 

source and a D ECTRIS EIGER 2 R 500K photon -counting detector (1028 x 514 pixels, 75 

μm pixel size). The so urce was run at 2.4 W (average energy 16 keV) , with a 1.2 μm e -beam 

spot size. The source -to -object distance was set to 16.16 mm and the source -to -detec tor 

distance was set to 207.20 mm, corresponding to an effective pixel size of approximately 5.8 

μm . One tomographic scan was performed, with 1200 projections and 15 s exposure time, for 

a total scan duration (including 30 flat field images and 36x2 pre - and post - alignment 

images, plus motor overhead) of 5.5 hours. The system is optimized for higher resolutions 

using much smaller samples , but the relatively large sample size imposed restrictions on the 

available magnification while keeping reasonable scan times. The acquired data were 

processed with a custom -developed pipeline written in Python , de tailed in 37 . As part of the 

pipeline, phase -retrieval was performed with the method by Paganin et al. 44 (δ = 3.7e -8, β 

=1.7e -10). Tomographic reconstruction was carried out with a GPU implementation of the 

Feldkamp -Davis -Kress algorithm 48 in the ASTRA toolbox 49 . In the reconstruction step, a 

super resolution factor of 2 was selected 50 , essentially interpolating the reconstruction onto a 

2x finer grid, for a final effective pixel size of 2.9 μm. 

5.5.  Histolo gy 

For the H&E staining, the paraffin -embedded samples were sectioned into 5-μm -thick 

sections. The sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through a series of 

graded alcohols . H&E staining was performed according to a standard protocol. Sect ions 

were scanned using Aperio’s Scanscope CS2 (with Scanscope console v.8.2.0.1263) at 20x 

magnification . Images were created using Scanscope software (Aperio ).

For the IF staining, 3-m-thick sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated through decreasing 

concentrations of alcohol. Heat -induced antigen retrieval (HIER) was performed using the 

DIVA decloaker (Biocare Medical) for 5 minutes at 110°C in a decloaking chamber (Biocare 

Medical). After a quick wash, Background Punisher (Biocare Medical) was applied for 10 

minutes at room temperature (RT) for 10 minutes to block nonspecific binding. Consequently, 

tissues were incubated overnight at 4°C with biotin -conjugated hyaluronic acid binding protein 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(HABP ) (1:100, AMS_HKD_BC41, Amsbio). Cy5 -conjugated streptavidin (1:200, SA1011, 

Invitrogen) was used for detection . Smooth muscle actin (SMA) and nuclei were stained with 

a Cy3 -conjugated primary SMA antibody (1:200, C6198, Sigma Aldrich) and DAPI (1:1000, 

MB D0015, Sigma Aldrich), respectively, for 1 hour at RT, along with the streptavidin 

incubation . 1% BSA in PBS was used as the antibody diluent, and slides were sealed with 

DAKO fluorescence mounting media (S3023, Agilent Technologies). Images were acquired at 

20 x magnification using a fluorescence microscope (Axioplan2 , Zeiss). 

5.6. Spatial transcriptomics on the Xenium platform 

Formalin -fixed, paraffin -embedded tissue sections (5 -μm -thick ) were mounted onto Xenium 

slides. The tissue sections were subsequently de paraffinized and decrosslinked according to 

the Xenium Deparaffinization and Decrosslinking Protocol (Demonstrated Protocol 

CG000580 , 10x Genomics ). Xenium Prime pre -designed probes were applied to hybridize to 

the target RNA. Following hybridization, an R Nase treatment was performed to release the 

RNA strands from the priming oligos. A polishing step was then carried out prior to the 

addition of the Xenium Prime 5K Human Pan -Tissue & Pathways probe set. These probes 

were hybridized to the target RNA, follo wed by ligation and enzymatic amplification, 

generating multiple copies of each RNA target, as described in the Probe Hybridization, 

Ligation, and Amplification User Guide (User Guide CG000760 , 10x Genomics ). Cell 

segmentation reagents were subsequently ap plied to label nuclei, cell membranes, and 

cytoplasmic compartments, providing the necessary inputs for automated, morphology -based 

cell segmentation. The prepared Xenium slides were then loaded onto the Xenium Analyzer 

for imaging and analysis, following the Decoding and Imaging User Guide (User Guide 

CG000584 , 10x Genomics ). Instrument software version 3.4.1.0 and analysis software 

version 3.3.0.1 were used for this workflow. 

5.7. Immunofluorescence Staining on Xenium -processed slides 

Cover slips of the Xenium -processed slides were removed in 1x PBS at 37°C. After a quick 

wash, HIER was performed using ready -made TRIS -EDTA, pH 9.0 (ab93684, Abcam), for 

30 minutes at 80°C in a decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical). Following HIER, the slides 

were first treated wi th Background Punisher (BP974H, Biocare Medical) at RT for 10 

minutes, followed by an additional hour of blocking at RT with 10% Goat Serum (B40913A, 

Thermo Fischer). 

Tissue sections were incubated with a primary antibod y for endothelial cells (CD31 (1:50 ), 

DIA -310, Dianova; Alexa Fluor 568 Conjugated IsolectinB4 (1:25), I21412, Thermo Fischer; 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and biotin -conjugated HABP (1:50), AMS_HKD_BC41 Amsbio) in 3% BSA in PBS 

overnight at 4°C. The next day, after a washing step , tissues were incubated with secondary 

antibod y (Goat anti -Rat IgG (H&L) - Cyanine5 (1:200), and streptavidin -Cy7 (1:100), both 

from Thermo Fischer) in 3% BSA in PBS for an hour at RT. Nuclei were stained using DAPI 

(1:200, MBD0015, Sigma Aldrich). Images were taken at 40 x magnification using a VS200 

imaging scanner (Olympus). 

5.8. Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE) Staining on Xenium -processed slides 

Following FS , the cover slips from Xenium -processed slides were removed as described 

above. The quencher was removed by immersing slides in 10 mM sodium hydro sulfite 

(157953, Sigma -Aldrich) according to the 10X Genomics` protocol (CG000613 -B, 10X 

Genomics). Subsequently, a standard H &E staining was performed on the slides using 

Mayer`s hematoxylin (01820, HistoLab) and 0.2% Eosin Y solution (01650, HistoLab). 

Tissues were dehydrated in increasing grades of alcohol and xylene. Cover slips were sealed 

using Pertex (00840, HistoLab) and images were taken at 40 x magnification using Slideview 

VS200 slide scanner (Olympus). 

5.9.  Image processing and analysis 

All the image processing and analysis were carried out on a workstation equipped with an 

Intel® Xeon® W -2133 CPU (3.60GHz, 6 Cores), 256 GB RAM and an NVIDIA Quadro 

P5000 GPU, with Windows 10 as operating system. 

The analysis was performed with a combination of differe nt functions in the software 

programs FIJI and Amira (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US) . It is 

important to note that, while FIJI is open source and freely available, Amira is a licensed 

software. While this software was used because of convenience and familiarity, functions 

similar to the ones employed in this work are also available in free software packages like 

FIJI itself, 3D Slicer, ilastik, ITK -SNAP, Dragonfly (free for academic users), in various 

more specific open source program ming toolboxes for segmentation (e .g . scikit -image) or 

registration (e .g. elastix), as well as in multiple other licensed software tools. 

5.9.1.  Morphology 

A first evaluation was performed by scrolling through the volumes in FIJI or in Amira (using 

the “orthoslice” module) . For a more precise interpretation , as well as for arbitrary selection 

of sectioning planes as shown in Figure 3, the “slice” module in Amira allowed easy rotation 

of the slicing direction .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The first semi -transparent volum e rendering (Figure 2 -A) , prior to any segmentation, was 

done using the “volren” module in Amira. 

All the s egmentation was performed in Amira. First, the volumes were corrected for local 

tomography artefacts (which manifest as grayscale gradients throughou t the volume) by 

estimating such artefacts with a second order polynomial fit (using the “background image” 

module) and dividing the original data with the estimated background. A median filter with a 

3x3x3 kernel was then applied, to reduce image noise wh ile still preserving edges. 

Segmentation of the hearts was achieved using the “magic wand” tool, which performs a 

region growing operation in 3D from a manually placed seed point; the region growing was 

restricted to a certain mask, set to allow grayscale values pertaining to tissue and exclude the 

ones associated to the paraffin embedding. The segmentation was then cleaned with an 

iteration of morphological closing. In the cases where they had not been surgically removed, 

also parts of the lungs or the thy mus were sometimes picked up by the “magic wand” tool if 

they were touching the heart; these were removed from the segmentation using the “lasso” 

tool, which allows to add or exclude voxels based on manual selection in 3D. 

The segmentation pipeline up to t his point would normally require around 30 minutes per 

heart, depending on the amount of extra tissue that had to be removed with the “lasso” tool, 

and on its positioning relative to the heart (a lot of tissue in very close proximity to the heart 

required a more careful selection). 

In order to better visualize the different heart chambers in a 3D rendering, the pericardium 

was also excluded from the segmentation. This was achieved with a combination of 

morphological opening and then manual adjustments with “lasso” tool and “draw” tool. 

Similarly, to improve the appearance of the renderings, residual blood that had been included 

by the “magic wand” tool was removed from the ventricles and the atria. This was done with 

the “texture classification” tool, exploi ting the fact that the residual blood had a grainier 

structure when compared to the rest of the segmented tissue. These cleaning steps, in 

particular the careful manual adjustments needed to completely remove the pericardium, 

added significant extra time ( in the order of hours) to the segmentation. 

The coronary circulation was segmented by first closing and filling the heart segmentation, 

and then using the “magic wand” tool restricted to the areas inside the heart and to an 

appropriate grayscale mask . Star ting from the cleaned segmentation of the previous step, this 

further step was relatively quick to perform, although some manual adjustments were 

required in spots where the coronary vessels were occluded by residual blood. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5.9.2.  Phenotyping 

The Adamts6 -deficien t heart was segmented with the same methods described in the previous 

section. In order to extract the luminal volumes of the cardiac chambers , the “c ompute 

ambient occlusion ” module (based on 51 ) was applied in Amira to the heart segmentation. 

From the resulting ambient occlusion image , the cardiac chambers were extracted with the 

“magic wand” tool. In case of connections, they were then s eparated into distinct labels using 

the “l asso ” tool. They were finally visualized either as semi -transparent volume renderings 

(all of Figure 3), or as semi -transparent mesh surface renderings (Figure 3 -E and 3 -F). 

5.9.3. Integration of histology and immunofluor escence 

The pipeline that was used in this study is outlined in Figure 4 and can be considered as being 

formed of three main groups of operations. 

The first group of operations has the purpose of preparing the data for the subsequent steps. 

The microscopy scans were first manually cropped so that they would roughly match the area 

that was scanned with PC -μCT. They were then converted from RGB to grayscale in FIJI ,

trying to obtain a relative contrast between the different types of tissue as similar to the one 

contained in the PC -μCT scans as possible. To this end, the RGB images were split using 

FIJI into their red, green and blue channels, or alternatively in their hue, saturation and 

brightness channels. The channel in which the contrast looked more like the PC -μCT scans 

was selected for grayscale conversion. This selection depended on the staining type, but once 

established a first time it was kept consistent for all sections of the same type. In the case of 

H&E staining , the green, saturation or brightne ss channels were all viable options (the red 

and blue channels instead would enhance the contrast for the cell nuclei, information that is 

not provided by PC -μCT at the employed resolution). Among those, the saturation channel 

was selected as it also reduc ed the artifacts caused by dust on the microscope’s lens. To save 

on computing time during the next step, the grayscale histological image was then binned to 

have the same pixel size as the PC -μCT data. 

After data preparation, the second group of operation s forms the first registration step, which 

was performed in Amira. Here, the grayscale binned histology and the PC -μCT data were 

loaded within the same 3D environment. The position of the histology relative to the PC -μCT 

was at first initialized manually, by dragging it approximately to the corresponding position 

in the PC -μCT volume (mostly caring that the data were not flipped and that rotation and 

height in the stack were reasonably close to the expected ones, but without dedicating a lot of 

time to fine adjustments). An automatic affine registration was then performed using the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

“register images” module. Since this module does not natively support 2D to 3D registration, 

the histology slice was first converted to a 3D format by simply duplicating it one ti me along 

the direction normal to the plane. The “register images” module was then applied, having the 

histology as moving data and the PC -μCT as static data. The module was run several times, 

each time with a progressively smaller initial step size but als o larger number of degrees of 

freedom. In all the steps, the normalized mutual information metric and the “quasi -Newton” 

optimizer (with a final step size always left at the default value of 1/6 of the voxel size) were 

used. In the first run, the module wa s set to perform only a rigid registration, only on 2x2x2 

binned data (i.e. ignoring the finest resolution), and with an initial step size of 20 for the 

optimizer (sometimes increased to even larger values after inspection of the results). The 

outcome was then visually assessed by comparing the histology image with the newly -found 

corresponding plane in the PC -μCT data. If no features were recognizable, the registration 

was reverted and the “register images” module was run again with a larger optimizer init ial 

step size, or possibly the manual initialization was re -performed before running the module 

again. If similar features were recognizable, with differences mostly being due to different 

scaling, the “register images” module was run a second time (withou t undoing the results of 

the previous step), while enabling isotropic scaling as an additional degree of freedom beside 

rigid transformation, and reducing the optimizer initial step size (typically to a value of 4). 

Lastly, the module was re -run one final time (on top of the previous results), enabling 

anisotropic scaling beside isotropic and rigid transformation, using full -size resolution instead 

of binning, and reducing the initial step size even further (typically to a value of 1). After the 

previous st eps were run for the binned histological image, the same affine transformation was 

also applied to the unbinned image (the scaling was automatically handled by the program 

after correctly setting the voxel sizes of binned and unbinned data). 

At this point of the pipeline, the match between histology and PC -μCT typically looks 

acceptable at a low magnification, but is clearly far from a 1 -to -1 match when evaluated at a 

zoomed -in level. This is due to local deformations of the tissue, which cannot be fixed wi th 

the global transformations performed so far. These deformations are addressed by the third 

group of operations in the pipeline, which consists of a 2D -to -2D elastic registration. From 

the previous step, the PC -μCT slice that matched the position of the histology was 

interpolated onto the higher -resolution grid of the unbinned histological data. This 

interpolated PC -μCT slice and the unbinned grayscale histology were then used as inputs for 

the bUnwarpJ plugin 52 in FIJI. The plugin performs 2D image registration based on elastic 

deformations represented by B -splines. The histology image was set as “source” (i.e. moving 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

data) and the PC -μCT was set as “target” (i.e. static data), and the registration mode to 

“mono” (i.e. only from source to target, no need for bidirectio nal registration as we assumed 

the PC -μCT data as ground -truth). The plugin offers an option to perform a subsampling of 

the data before computing the registration; the transformation is then applied to the unbinned 

data. To reduce computing time, this opt ion was used with a subsampling factor of 1, i.e. a 

2x2 binning. The “initial deformation” and “final deformation” parameters, which regulate 

the coarsest and finest scale of the splice deformation field, were set to “fine” and “super 

fine” respectively (c orresponding to 4x4 intervals and 16x16 intervals in the B -spline grid). 

The other parameters were left as defaults (“image weight” = 1.0, “consistency weight” =

10.0, “stop threshold” = 0.01, all the other weights were left at 0), and the option to save t he 

transformation was enabled. After processing the grayscale histology, the saved 

transformation was then used to process the RGB original version. The output was loaded 

into Amira and positioned into the correct 3D orientation by applying to it the same affine 

registration obtained from the previous step. It was then possible to visualize it in the 3D 

environment together with renderings and virtual slices based on the PC -μCT data, as 

described in the previous section. 

In the case of FS data , t he only dif ference was in the pre -processing step, during which, in 

order to extract grayscale morphological information similar to PC -μCT, the DAPI staining 

image was isolated and heavily smoothed with a Gaussian filter of σ = 7 to fill out the space 

between the cel l nuclei . The same steps described above were then performed and applied to 

the complete FS images .

5.9.4.  Integration of spatial transcriptomics 

For the spatial transcriptomics d ata, the same registration pipeline as in the previous section 

was applied. The gray sc ale image used for morphological information was the “ Interior –

RNA ” image (18S rRNA) that is acquired as part of the Xenium protocol for automatic cell 

segmentation. 

After registration, the same transformations could be applied to any other image, such as the 

individual transcripts as shown in Figure 7 or clusters as shown in Figure 8. 

The fluorescent staining and H&E images acquired after ISS had to be registered as well, 

since the processing had deformed the tissue structure. The 2D -to -2D registration was 

performed using Amira and bUnwarpJ in a simila r way as the 2D -to -3D registrations. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5.9.5.  La boratory -based PC -μCT 

The SRPC -μCT and L BPC -μCT datasets were registered to each other using the “register 

images” module in Amira selecting affine transformation wit h the mutual information metric .

The same virtual slice was then extracted from all the volumes. 

# 6. Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge the Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland, for provision 

of synchrotron radiation beamtime at the TOMCAT beamline X02DA of the Swiss Light 

Source (proposal numbers 20201620 and 20191567 ).

We acknowledge SOLEIL for provision of synchrotron radiation facilities and we would like 

to thank Jonathan Perrin and Timm Weitkamp for assistance in using the ANATOMIX 

beamline under pr oposal 20240499 .

This work was supported by the Swedish Heart -Lung Foundation (to KTL), the Swedish 

Research Council (to KTL), the Skåne County Council (to KTL) , the Knut and Alice 

Wallenberg Foundation (to KTL) and a Paul G. Allen -American Heart Association 

Distinguished Scientist award ( 17DIA33820024 to S AA) . NP was supported for part of his 

work by a scholarship from the Tegger Foundation . ACM is partially funded by AMBER 

Grant agreement ID: 

101126665 (to KTL) . The AMBER program is a Marie Skłodowska -Curie Actions Program 

within the European Commission MSCA framework. Funded by the European Union. Views 

and opinions expressed are, however, those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily 

reflect those of the European Union or MSCA. Neither the European Union nor the MSCA 

can be held responsible for them. 

# 7. Author contributions 

NP, KTL, KT conceived the study and designed the experiments. KTL, S AA and MB 

provided funding and resources. KIG and TJM performed anima l experiments and prepared 

the tissue samples. NP, KTL, AB, TJF, EL agervall , ELampei, TD, RK and MB performed the 

synchrotron -based PC -μCT experiments. JR perfo rmed the laboratory -based PC -μCT 

experiment on the commercial scanner. RK and TD performed the l aboratory -based PC -μCT 

experiment on the custom -made scanner. KIG, EL ampei and KTL performed histological 

sectioning and staining for H&E and fluorescent staining . TJF and EL agervall performed the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

sectioning for in -situ sequencing. KT and RS performed the in -situ sequencing experiments. 

ACM performed fluorescent staining and H&E after in -situ sequencing. NP performed the 

data analysis. NP and KTL wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the final version 

of the manuscript .

# 8. References 

1 Zimmerman, M. S. et al.  Global, regional, and national burden of congenital heart 

disease, 1990 –2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 

2017.  The Lancet Child &amp; Adolescent Health  4, 185 -200 (2020). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/s2352 -4642(19)30402 -x

2 Snider, P. & Conway, S. J. Probing human cardiovascular congenital disease using 

transgenic mouse models. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 100 , 83 -110 (2011). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/b978 -0-12 -384878 -9.00003 -0

3 Dejea, H., Bonnin, A., Cook, A. C. & Garcia -Canadilla, P. Cardiac multi -scale 

investigation of the right and left ventricle ex vivo: a rev iew. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther 

10 , 1701 -1717 (2020).  https://doi.org/10.21037/cdt -20 -269 

4 Li, K. Y. C. et al. Feasibility and safety of synchrotron -based X -ray phase contrast 

imaging as a technique complemen tary to histopathology analysis. Histochemistry 

and Cell Biology (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00418 -023 -02220 -6

5 Jeremiasen, I. et al. Synchrotron -Based Phase -Contrast Micro -CT Combined With 

Histology to Decipher Differences Between Hereditary and Sporadic Pediatric 

Pulmonary Veno -Occlusive Disease. Pulm. Circ. 14 (2024). 

https://doi.org/10.1002/pul2.70024 

6 Norvik, C. et al. Synchrotron -based phase -contrast micro -CT as a tool for 

understanding pulmonary vascular pathobiology and the 3 -D microanatomy of 

alveolar capillary dysplasia. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 318 , L65 -L75 

(2020).  https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00103.2019 

7 Reichardt, M., Frohn, J., Khan, A., Alves, F. & Salditt, T. Multi -scale X -ray phase -

contrast tomography of murine heart tissue. Biomed. Opt. Express 11 , 2633 -2651 

(2020).  https://doi.org/10.1364/BOE.386576 

8 Frohn, J. et al. Three -dimensional structure of entire hydrated murine hearts at 

histological resolution. Sci Rep -Uk 15 , 2766 (2025).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -

024 -83853 -y

9 Mead, T. J. et al. ADAMTS7, a target in atherosclerosis, cooperates with its homolog 

ADAMTS12 to protect against myxomatous valve degeneration. Journal of 

Molecular and Cellular Cardiology Plus 11 , 100288 (2025). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmccpl.2025.100288 

10 Mead, T. J. et al. Combined genetic -pharmacologic inactivation of tightly linked 

ADAMTS pr oteases in temporally specific windows uncovers distinct roles for 

versican proteolysis and glypican -6 in cardiac development. Matrix Biology 131 , 1 -16 

(2024).  https://doi.org/htt ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2024.05.003 

11 Gawlik, K. I. et al. Laminin γ1 chain is essential for the cardiorespiratory and 

muscular systems. Matrix Biology 141 , 47 -66 (2025). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2025.08.006 

12 Reichardt, M., Frohn, J., Khan, A., Alves, F. & Salditt, T. Multi -scale X -ray phase -

contrast tomography of murine heart tissue. Biomed Opt Express 11 , 2633 -2651 

(2020).  https://doi.org/10.1364/boe.386576 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 Dejea, H. et al. Comprehensive Analysis of Animal Models of Cardiovascular 

Disease using Multiscale X -Ray Phase Contrast Tomography. Sci Rep -Uk 9 (2019). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -019 -43407 -z

14 Gonzalez -Tendero, A. et al. Whole heart detailed and quantitative anatomy, myofibre 

structure and vasculature from X -ray phase -contrast synchrotron radiation -based 

micro computed tomograph y. European Heart Journal - Cardiovascular Imaging 18 ,

732 -741 (2017).  https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjci/jew314 

15 Planinc, I. et al. Comprehensive assessment of myocardial remodeling in ischemic 

heart disea se by synchrotron propagation based X -ray phase contrast imaging. Sci 

Rep -Uk 11 , 14020 (2021).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -021 -93054 -6

16 Garcia -Canadilla, P. et al. Complex Congenital Heart Disease Associated With 

Disordered Myocardial Architecture in a Midtrimester Human Fetus. Circulation: 

Cardiovascular Imaging 11 (2018).  https://doi.org/10.1161/circim aging.118.007753 

17 Wang, S. et al. Investigating the three -dimensional myocardial micro -architecture in 

the laminar structure using X -ray phase -contrast microtomography. Sci Rep -Uk 14 ,

14329 (2024).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -024 -65371 -z

18 Skreb, N. et al. Synchrotron -based X -ray 3D phase contrast imaging and analysis of 

transmural myocardial tissue from heart failure patients. Sci Rep -Uk 15 , 25867 

(2025).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -025 -04012 -5

19 Walsh, C. L. et al. Imaging intact human organs with local resolution of cellular 

structures using hierarchical phase -contrast tomography. Nature Methods 18 , 1532 -

1541 (2021).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592 -021 -01317 -x

20 Brunet, J. et al. Multidimensional Analysis of the Adult Human Heart in Health and 

Disease Using Hierarchical Phase -Contrast Tomography. Radiology 312 , e232731 

(20 24).  https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.232731 

21 Reichardt, M., Töpperwien, M., Khan, A., Alves, F. & Salditt, T. Fiber orientation in 

a whole mouse heart reconstructed by laboratory phase -contrast micro -CT. Journal of 

Medical Imaging 7, 023501 (2020). 

22 Vågberg, W., Persson, J., Szekely, L. & Hertz, H. M. Cellular -resolution 3D virtual 

histology of human coronary arteries using x -ray phase tomography. Sci Rep -Uk 8,

11014 (2018).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018 -29344 -3

23 Migga, A. et al. Comparative hard x -ray tomography for virtual histology of zebrafish 

larva, human tooth cementum, and porcine nerve. Journal of Medical Imaging 9,

031507 (2022 ). 

24 Albers, J. et al. High Throughput Tomography (HiTT) on EMBL beamline P14 on 

PETRA III. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 31 , 186 -194 (2024). 

https://doi.org/doi:10.1107/S160057752300944X 

25 Rodgers, G. et al. Virtual histology of an entire mouse brain from formalin fixation to 

paraffin embedding. Part 2: Volumetric strain fields and local contrast changes. 

Journal of Neuroscience Methods 365 , 109385 (2022). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2021.109385 

26 Chicherova, N. et al. Automatic deformable registration of histological slides to μCT 

volume data. Journal of Microscopy 271 , 49 -61 (2018). 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jmi.12692 

27 Khimchenko, A. et al. Extending two -dimensional histology into the third dimension 

through conventional micro computed tomography. NeuroImage 139 , 26 -36 (2016). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.06.005 

28 Albers, J. et al. Elastic transformation of histological slices allows precise co -

registration with microCT data sets for a refined virtual histology approach. Sci Rep -

Uk 11 , 10846 (2021).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -021 -89841 -w

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 Reiser, J. et al. Integrated 3D imaging of FFPE lung tissue combining microCT, light 

and electron microscopy allows for contextualized ultrastructural and histological 

analysis. Sci Rep -Uk 15 , 18656 (2025).  https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -025 -02770 -w

30 Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open -source platform for biological -image analysis. Nat 

Methods 9, 676 -682 (2012).  https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019 

31 Lai, W. W. et al. Guidelines and standards for performance of a pediatric 

echocardiogram: a report from the Task Force of the Pediatric Council of the 

American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 19 , 1413 -1430 

(2006).  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2006.09.001 

32 Mead, T. J. et al. Proteolysis of fibrillin -2 microfibrils is essential for normal skeletal 

development. eLife 11 , e71142 (2022).  https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71142 

33 Prins, B. P. et al.  Exome -chip meta -analysis identifies novel loci associated with 

cardiac conduction, including ADAMTS6.  Genome Biology  19 , 87 (2018). 

https:/ /doi.org/10.1186/s13059 -018 -1457 -6

34 Sirek, J. M., Rush, E. H., Darodkar, A., Apte, S. S. & Mead, T. J. Generation of a 

conditional Adamts6 mouse allele reveals roles in lung maturation in addition to 

cardiac and musculoskeletal development. Matrix Biolog y Plus 28 , 100186 (2025). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbplus.2025.100186 

35 Feng, W. et al. Single -cell transcriptomic analysis identifies murine heart molecular 

fea tures at embryonic and neonatal stages. Nat Commun 13 , 7960 (2022). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -35691 -7

36 Lázár, E. et al. Spatiotemporal gene expression and cellular dynamics of the 

develo ping human heart. Nat Genet 57 , 2756 -2771 (2025). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588 -025 -02352 -6

37 Dreier, T. et al. Laboratory x -ray nano -computed tomography for biomedical 

research. Journal of Instr umentation 19 , P10021 (2024).  https://doi.org/10.1088/1748 -

0221/19/10/P10021 

38 Russell, W. M. S. & Burch, R. L. The principles of humane experimental technique .

(Methuen, 1959). 

39 Rowan, A. N. Of mice, models, and men : a critical evaluation of animal research .

(State University of New York Press, 1984). 

40 Lee, H. et al. Open -source, high -throughput targeted in situ transcriptomics for 

developmental and tissue biology. Development 151 (2024 ). 

https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.202448 

41 Weitkamp, T. et al. The tomography beamline ANATOMIX at Synchrotron SOLEIL. 

Journal of Physics: Conference Series 849 , 012037 (2017). 

https://doi.org/10.1088/1742 -6596/849/1/012037 

42 Jørgensen, M., Sørensen, D., Kantor, I. & Oller, S. DanMAX –The new materials 

science beamline at MAX IV. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. A Found. Adv 77 , C821 -C821 

(2021). 

43 Stampanoni, M. et al. TOMCAT: A beamline for TOmographic Microscopy and 

Coherent rAdiology experimenTs. AIP Conference Proceedings 879 , 848 -851 (2006). 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.24361 93 

44 Paganin, D., Mayo, S. C., Gureyev, T. E., Miller, P. R. & Wilkins, S. W. 

Simultaneous phase and amplitude extraction from a single defocused image of a 

homogeneous object. J Microsc 206 , 33 -40 (2002).  https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365 -

2818.2002.01010.x 

45 Marone, F. & Stampanoni, M. Regridding reconstruction algorithm for real -time 

tomographic imaging. J Synchrotron Radiat 19 , 1029 -1037 (2012). 

https://doi.org/10.1107/S0909049512032864 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720617 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 Mirone, A., Brun, E., Gouillart, E., Tafforeau, P. & Kieffer, J. The PyHST2 hybrid 

distributed code for high speed tomographic reconstruction with iterative 

reconstruction and a priori knowledge capa bilities. Nuclear Instruments and Methods 

in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 324 , 41 -

48 (2014).  https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nimb .2013.09.030 

47 European Synchrotron Radiation, F. PyHST2 documentation. (Accessed on 

2026/04/23). < https://ftp.esrf.fr/scisoft/PYHST2/ >. 

48 Feldkamp, L. A., Davis, L. C. & Kress, J. W. Practical cone -be am algorithm. J. Opt. 

Soc. Am. A 1, 612 (1984).  https://doi.org/10.1364/josaa.1.000612 

49 van Aarle, W. et al. Fast and flexible X -ray tomography using the ASTRA toolbox. 

Opt Express 24 , 25129 -25147 (2 016).  https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.24.025129 

50 Dreier, T., Peruzzi, N., Lundström, U. & Bech, M. Improved resolution in x -ray 

tomography by super -resolution. Appl. Opt. 60 , 5783 -5794 (2021). 

https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.427934 

51 Baum, D. & Titschack, J. Cavity and Pore Segmentation in 3D Images with Ambient 

Occlusion. 113 -117 (2016). < https://doi.org/10.2312/eurovisshort.20161171 >. 

52 Arganda -Carreras, I. et al. in Computer Vision Approaches to Medical Image 

Analysis. (eds Reinhard R. Beichel & Milan Sonka) 85 -95 (Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg).