Title: QCAgent: An agentic framework for quality-controllable pathology report generation from whole slide image

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.01647v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 03:14:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
## QCAgent: An agentic framework for quality-controllable pathology report generation from whole slide image 

Rundong Wang 1,2†, Wei Ba 3†, Ying Zhou 1,2, Yingtai Li 1,2, Bowen Liu 1,2,Baizhi Wang 1,2, Yuhao Wang 1,2, Zhidong Yang 4, Kun Zhang 1,2, Rui Yan 1,2 B,and Shaohua Kevin Zhou 1,2B 

> 1

School of Biomedical Engineering, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, P.R. China  

> 2

Center for Medical Imaging, Robotics, Analytic Computing & Learning (MIRACLE), Suzhou Institute for Advance Research, USTC, 215123, P.R. China  

> 3

Chinese PLA General Hospital Ninth Medical Center, China  

> 4

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong, China 

Abstract. Recent methods for pathology report generation from whole-slide image (WSI) are capable of producing slide-level diagnostic descrip-tions but fail to ground fine-grained statements in localized visual evi-dence. Furthermore, they lack control over which diagnostic details to include and how to verify them. Inspired by emerging agentic analy-sis paradigms and the diagnostic workflow of pathologists, who selec-tively examine multiple fields of view, we propose QCAgent , an agen-tic framework for quality-controllable WSI report generation. The core innovations of this framework are as follows: (i) it incorporates a cus-tomized critique mechanism guided by a user-defined checklist specifying required diagnostic details and constraints; (ii) it re-identifies informative regions in the WSI based on the critique feedback and text-patch seman-tic retrieval, a process that iteratively enriches and reconciles the report. Experiments demonstrate that by making report requirements explic-itly prompt-defined, constraint-aware, and verifiable through evidence-grounded refinement, QCAgent enables controllable generation of clini-cally meaningful and high-coverage pathology reports from WSI. 

Keywords: Whole Slide Image · Pathology Report Generation · Agent 

· Quality-controllability. 

1 Introduction 

Pathology foundation models [17,12,21,25,26] have significantly advanced whole slide image (WSI) analysis and its applications. Among its applications, WSI-to-Text generation promises to reduce the pathologist’s burden and enhance diag-nostic consistency by generating descriptions [20,4,10,15]. Unlike general image 

> †

Equal contribution. BCorresponding authors.  

> arXiv:2603.01647v1 [cs.CV] 2 Mar 2026 2R. Wang et al.

captioning, however, a clinical standard report must not only provide a final diagnosis but also rigorously cover specimen context, microscopic morphological descriptors (e.g., nuclear pleomorphism), and critical predictors such as lympho-vascular invasion (LVI). Due to the gigapixel scale of WSIs, current generative models (e.g., HistGen [10], SGMT [18] and PRISM [20]) predominantly follow a single-pass paradigm, leading to two intractable issues. First, feature collapse occurs: to maintain com-putational feasibility, the model compresses thousands of image patches into compact global vectors. This drastic dimensionality reduction, while capturing general lesions, inevitably erases spatially sparse but diagnostically decisive fea-tures, such as micro-lesions or evidence of LVI [5]. Second, linguistic prior bias arises: lacking a “visual look-back” mechanism, Large Language Models (LLMs) tend to hallucinate generic clinical commons (e.g., “cellular atypia”) based on diagnostic labels (e.g., “gastric cancer”) when global features are insufficient for detailed synthesis. Such details lack correlation with specific visual evidence from the current slide and do not address missing information required for clinical quality control, severely undermining the clinical credibility of reports [7]. To bridge the gap between global context and local evidence, we draw in-spiration from how pathologists iteratively navigate between low-power screen-ing and high-power verification. This workflow aligns with emerging agentic paradigms [13,19,24,23,29]. Although recent work has explored agents in com-putational pathology [22,9,3,2,11,16], agentic on-demand back-tracking for con-trollable, evidence-grounded report generation remains underexplored. Motivated by this, we propose QCAgent, an agent-based, quality-controllable pathology report generation framework. First, the system employs a WSI foun-dation model, PRISM [20], to extract global semantic features, supplemented by representative patch information via a cluster-based random sampling strategy. Subsequently, it invokes a pathology-expert reasoning model, Patho-R1 [28], to generate an initial draft. Crucially, we introduce a quality control module that utilizes advanced LLMs [6,27,1] to simulate a pathologist’s auditing behavior. It identifies critical missing information, converts them into targeted retrieval instructions, and triggers Patho-R1 to revise the report. This process iterates until the report passes the QC criteria. This mechanism enables evidence-based report generation by explicitly aligning visual findings with clinical narratives. The main contributions of this paper are three-fold: 

• Iterative QC architecture. We reformulate report generation as a multi-round audit–retrieve–revise process. A structured QCAgent automatically iden-tifies non-compliant statements and missing clinical information, enabling closed-loop refinement. 

• Demand-driven evidence retrieval. We introduce a text-guided evidence retrieval mechanism. Instead of random sampling, the QCAgent converts miss-ing fields into morphology-oriented queries to retrieve the most relevant visual patches from the WSI, grounding the report completion in targeted evidence. 

• Strict anti-hallucination design. We adopt an evidence-priority scheme (supplemental visual evidence > initial draft) to reduce hallucinations. By ex-QCAgent for quality-controllable WSI report generation 3Cluster-     

> based Patch
> Selection
> Patch
> Report
> Generation
> WSI Report Generation
> Patch Report
> WSI Report
> Feedback-
> guided Patch
> Selection Patch Report
> Previous Round
> Output

Feedback 

> Patch Selection
> Tool -2
> Patch Selection
> Tool -1

(a) Initial-round Pathology Report Generation Patch Selection Tool -1     

> Patch Selection Tool -2
> Cluster
> Cluster1 Cluster2 Cluster3 Cluster4
> Feedback Text_emb .
> Text
> Quality-Control Criteria

Prompt_1:" NO-FABRICATION: Never fabricate clinical data. 

> Unverifiable information must be omitted and logged as 'need_more_info'."

Prompt_2: "EVIDENCE PRIORITY: SUPPLEMENT_EVIDENCE > 

> DATASET_CONTEXT > WSI_REPORT. Always override the initial draft
> with retrieved visual evidence."

Prompt_3 :"FIELD CLASSIFICATION: Categorize missing fields into 

> 'image_related' (triggers WSI retrieval) or 'admin_required' (halts retrieval)."

WSI 

Agent 

Agent 

WSI  

> Selected Patches
> Selected Patches
> Final Generated
> Pathology Report
> Patch
> Report
> Generation
> Patch
> Patch emb .
> CONCH
> Text-Patch
> Matching

(b) Quality-Control 

Round Pathology 

Report Generation      

> Initial Generated
> Pathology Report
> Iterate NTimes Until
> Quality-Control Criteria
> Are Met
> Patho-R1
> CONCH
> PRISM
> Patho-R1

Fig. 1. Pipeline of QCAgent: (a) initial-round report generation using PRISM and cluster-based patch selection (Tool-1) with Patho-R1 patch reports; (b) QC-round iterative refinement using feedback-guided CONCH retrieval (Tool-2) and Patho-R1 evidence until QC criteria are met. 

plicitly separating verifiable from non-verifiable fields, only evidence-supported claims are retained in the final report. 

2 Method 

This section elaborates on the proposed QCAgent, an agent-based, quality-controllable framework for pathology report generation from Whole Slide Im-ages (WSIs), as illustrated in Fig. 1. The overall computational pipeline of this framework consists of two core stages: (a) Initial-round generation , which aims to rapidly construct a WSI-level draft and extracts local visual evidence with global coverage; and (b) Quality-Control (QC) rounds of iterative generation , which translates information gaps within the report into explicit “evidence demands”. Through a closed-loop mechanism of “feedback-guided ev-idence retrieval” and “evidence-driven revision”, this stage progressively fulfills stringent quality control criteria. 

Problem Formulation. Given a whole-slide image (WSI) S and a set of pre-extracted patch features F = {f1, . . . , f N } obtained by CONCH[14], together with an initial draft report r0 produced by a foundation model, our goal is to generate an informative and accurate pathology report r∗ through T rounds of iterative refinement. We formulate the process as a multi-round optimization with a maximum of T iterations: 

r∗ = QC -Iterate( r0, F, S ; T ), (1) 4 R. Wang et al. 

where each iteration comprises four consecutive stages: (i) quality-control (QC) assessment, (ii) evidence retrieval, (iii) visual diagnosis, and (iv) report revision. We define quality-controllability as the capability of the system to explicitly follow and enforce a predefined set of quality control criteria K during inference. These criteria include, but are not limited to, a report schema, required fields, anti-hallucination rules, evidence-priority principles, and standardized writing templates. At each iteration, the system outputs structured QC results, enabling users to dynamically configure (K, T ) to achieve a controllable trade-off between generation quality and computational cost. Under this formulation, “controllabil-ity” is not merely post-hoc scoring; instead, hard constraints are embedded into an iterative “audit–evidence seeking–revision” closed loop, yielding a transparent and auditable reasoning trace. Concretely, our QC prompts implement three core rules: 

NO-FABRICATION: Never fabricate clinical data. Any unverifiable infor-mation must be omitted from the report and explicitly logged as need_more_info .

EVIDENCE PRIORITY: When supplemental evidence conflicts with the initial draft, revisions follow the priority order SUPPLEMENT_EVIDENCE >

DATASET_CONTEXT > WSI_REPORT. 

FIELD CLASSIFICATION: Missing fields are categorized into image_related 

and admin_required .

Initial Round: Global Draft and Coverage-Oriented Evidence Extraction. As il-lustrated in Fig. 1(a), the initial round consists of two parallel streams: 1. WSI-level report generation (PRISM). We first employ a pretrained WSI-level foundation model to produce an initial draft report r0, which serves as a global narrative backbone for subsequent refinement. 2. Cluster-based patch selection (Patch Selection Tool-1). To provide representative coverage-oriented evidence in the initial round, we perform clustering in the feature embedding space over candidate patches and uni-formly sample from each cluster to construct a representative patch set P(1) .This strategy ensures comprehensive initial information selection. 3. Patch-level report generation (Patho-R1). The selected patches P(1) 

are then fed into the pathology vision-language model (VLM) Patho-R1 to generate patch-level descriptions E(1) , which serve as detailed evidence. In practice, Patho-R1 is executed in batches and produces fine-grained diagnos-tic cues, providing direct visual evidence to complement the WSI-level draft. Finally, the agent fuses the global draft and local evidence to produce the initial generated report r′

> 0

, which is the starting point for the subsequent QC iterations. 

Quality-Control Rounds: Feedback-Guided Evidence Seeking and Evidence-Driven Revision. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the QC rounds take the previous-round report 

together with accumulated evidence and the quality criteria as inputs, and per-form closed-loop refinement with a maximum of T iterations. At iteration t, the QCAgent conducts a fine-grained, structured audit of the previous report rt−1 and outputs: (i) a set of missing key fields Mt, (ii) a set of QCAgent for quality-controllable WSI report generation 5

Algorithm 1 Agent-Based Framework for Quality-Controllable                                                          

> Input: WSI S, patch features F, coordinates C, quality criteria K, max rounds T
> Output: Final generated report r∗
> 1: r0←PRISM( S)
> 2: P(1) ←Tool -1_ClusterSelect( S)
> 3: E(1) ←PathoR1( P(1) )
> 4: r′
> 0←AgentFuse( r0,E(1) ;K)
> 5: for t= 1 , . . . , T do
> 6: (Mt,Qt, r ′
> t)←QC( rt−1,Et−1;K)
> 7: if Pass( Mt,K)then
> 8: break
> 9: end if
> 10: P(2)
> t←Tool -2_CONCH -Retrieve( Qt,F,C)
> 11: Et←PathoR1( P(2)
> t)
> 12: rt←Revise( r′
> t,Et;K)
> 13: end for
> 14: return r∗←rt

morphology-driven retrieval queries Qt, and (iii) a revised draft r′

> t

. The query set Qt follows a demand-driven principle (“retrieve what is missing”). For ex-ample, when lymphovascular invasion (LVI) is missing, the agent generates a morphology-oriented query such as “Histopathological evidence for lymphovascu-lar invasion in gastric adenocarcinoma.” Meanwhile, the QCAgent enforces the 

NO-FABRICATION rule: for any field that cannot be supported by reliable visual evidence from the WSI, the system refuses to hallucinate and explicitly logs it as need_more_info .Tool-2 performs text-guided retrieval in the CONCH’s embedding space: 1. Text encoding: Compute the normalized query embedding q = CONCH text (Qt);2. Similarity search: Retrieve TopK patches via cosine similarity using a FAISS IndexFlatIP index, i.e., TopK( {q · fi}Ni=1 );3. De-duplication: Exclude patches already retrieved in previous rounds to reduce redundancy; 4. Patch cropping: Return the Top-K patch coordinates and similarity scores, and crop the corresponding high-resolution patches from the original WSI. Compared with random sampling or global clustering alone, this demand-driven retrieval paradigm pinpoints tissue regions most relevant to the current QC feedback, substantially improving the efficiency of evidence acquisition. The retrieved patches are then re-input to Patho-R1 to generate fine-grained descriptions, yielding a new set of supplemental evidence Et. This evidence is fed back into the subsequent QC loop as key supporting material for revision. The agent produces the revised report rt by integrating (rt−1, Et, K). The it-erative process terminates when any of the following conditions holds: (i) the report satisfies all QC criteria; (ii) the remaining missing fields are all non-image-evidenceable; or (iii) the iteration budget reaches T .6 R. Wang et al. 

Table 1. Quantitative results of WSI report generation on two datasets. Dataset Method BLEU-1 BLEU-4 ROUGE-L METEOR FieldRecall BERTScore TCGA-STAD PRISM (Baseline) 0.0986 0.0319 0.0947 0.0985 0.3208 0.1245 QCAgent (Ours) 0.2857 0.0836 0.2784 0.4087 0.6335 0.2738 In-house PRISM (Baseline) 0.0226 0.0083 0.0484 0.0333 0.1908 -0.0831 QCAgent (Ours) 0.0924 0.0186 0.2490 0.2307 0.4863 0.2370 

3 Experiments and Results 

3.1 Datasets and Evaluation Metrics 

Datasets. To assess generalization across clinical settings and languages, we evaluate our framework on two independent, large-scale cohorts of gastric cancer: 

TCGA-STAD (public, English). This cohort contains high-resolution WSIs from stomach adenocarcinoma in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). For TCGA-STAD, we use the slide-level pathology reports from TITAN [8] as ground-truth. 

In-house dataset (private, Chinese). This cohort consists of 524 H&E WSIs. Ground-truth is the corresponding Chinese clinical pathology reports, which are highly structured and concise, emphasizing factual statements. 

Evaluation metrics. We report both traditional text overlap metrics (BLEU-1/4, ROUGE-L, METEOR) and a semantic similarity metric (BERTScore). We also introduce a clinically motivated Field Recall , which measures the proportion of clinically critical pathology fields successfully covered by the generated report. 

Baseline and implementation details. We adopt PRISM, a publicly available WSI-level foundation model, as the initial-report baseline. To validate the effec-tiveness of iterative quality control, we compare the one-pass draft generated by PRISM (without QC) against the final output of QCAgent. Our setup employs the CONCH encoder for text retrieval (Tool-2), Patho-R1 for visual generation, and Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Thinking as the core QCAgent. The QC loop runs for up to T = 3 iterations. At each iteration, Tool-2 retrieves the top K = 3 

patches for each QC query, with previously retrieved patches excluded to reduce redundancy. 

3.2 Experimental Results Results on TCGA-STAD (English). Compared with the PRISM baseline, our QCAgent achieves consistent and substantial improvements across all met-rics on TCGA-STAD (Table 1). Notably, Field Recall increases from 32.08% to 63.35%, indicating that the iterative QC process successfully recovers clinically important missing findings. In addition, we observe a clear increase in report completeness: PRISM reports are typically brief, while QC-refined reports pro-vide more detailed and comprehensive descriptions. QCAgent for quality-controllable WSI report generation 7Ours Ground-Truth 

The slide from the gastric antrum shows 

a tubular adenocarcinoma, histologic 

grade III (poorly differentiated), intestinal 

type (Lauren classification), with a 

largest tumor size of 9.0 cm. Features 

include ulceration, local invasion to the 

serosa, and evidence of neural, 

lymphatic, and blood vessel invasion. 

The slide from the stomach shows a poorly differentiated 

adenocarcinoma with an infiltrative growth pattern, characterized by 

marked nuclear atypia, frequent mitoses, and stromal desmoplasia. 

The tumor cells form irregular glandular structures with luminal 

necrosis and loss of polarity, consistent with a high-grade malignant 

phenotype. Infiltration into the muscularis propria is confirmed by 

tumor cells invading between smooth muscle bundles, indicating 

deep wall invasion. A prominent desmoplastic stromal reaction is 

observed... Lymphovascular invasion is identified, and perineural 

invasion is present. The tumor demonstrates mucin production and 

is consistent with intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma (Lauren 

classification). 

The slide from the body of the stomach shows a poorly 

differentiated adenocarcinoma with a mixed mucinous and signet 

ring cell component, characterized by an infiltrative growth pattern. 

The tumor exhibits marked nuclear atypia, cytoplasmic mucin 

vacuoles, and abundant extracellular mucin pools... 

Lymphovascular invasion is identified, and perineural invasion is 

present. The tumor invades through the full thickness of the gastric 

wall, extending into the subserosal adipose tissue. The proximal 

and distal surgical margins are free of tumor. Metastatic carcinoma 

is present in multiple lymph nodes , with findings consistent with a 

mixed mucinous and signet ring cell variant of gastric 

adenocarcinoma. 

The slide from the body of the stomach shows a 

poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, partially 

of the diffuse type (signet-ring carcinoma), with 

infiltration into the subserosa and multiple 

regional lymph node metastases (pT2b pN2). 

Diagnosis: High-grade 

serous carcinoma of the 

ovary and fallopian tube. 

Diagnosis: Metastatic 

adenocarcinoma with signet 

ring features in lung tissue. 

Prism WSI 

TCGA-CG-4444 

TCGA-VQ-A91Y 

TCGA-HU-A4GQ 

The slide from the stomach shows a gastric adenocarcinoma 

with mixed differentiation, including both moderately 

differentiated (G2) and poorly differentiated (G3) components, 

demonstrating an infiltrative growth pattern with marked nuclear 

pleomorphism, architectural disruption, and loss of cellular 

polarity. The tumor exhibits stromal invasion, desmoplastic 

stroma, increased mitotic activity, and mucinous differentiation 

in some areas. Additional features include peritumoral 

lymphocytic infiltrate, focal necrosis, and tumor budding. The 

exact tumor size, depth of invasion, lymphovascular and 

perineural invasion status, surgical margin status, lymph node 

metastasis counts, and TNM staging remain undetermined. 

Diagnosis: Moderately 

differentiated 

adenocarcinoma of the 

sigmoid colon with lymph 

node metastasis. 

The slide from the gastric antrum shows 

a moderately differentiated tubular 

adenocarcinoma (T4b) with infiltrative 

growth pattern. Lymphovascular and 

perineural invasion are present. 

Metastasis observed in 4 out of 49 

inferior gastric lymph nodes. 

Fig. 2. Qualitative comparison of pathology reports on TCGA-STAD. For each case, we show the WSI thumbnail, the ground-truth clinical report, the one-pass draft generated by PRISM, and our QC-refined report. 

Results on In-house Cohort (Chinese). We further evaluate cross-lingual transfer by directly applying our QCAgent to the private Chinese cohort without any finetuning on Chinese pathology data. As shown in Table 1, the QCAgent yields marked improvements over PRISM across overlap-based metrics and se-mantic similarity. We note that the Chinese ground-truth reports are highly con-densed, often in phrase-like formats, while our system generates more detailed narrative paragraphs. This stylistic mismatch can depress n-gram matching met-rics. Nevertheless, the improvement in BERTScore-F1 suggests better alignment at the semantic and factual level. 

Qualitative comparison. QCAgent improves clinical completeness. Compared with PRISM draft, QCAgent adds morphology-grounded descriptions for pre-viously missing fields and avoids unsupported claims by marking non-image-verifiable information as undetermined (Fig. 2); a representative step-by-step case study is shown in Fig. 3. 

3.3 Ablation Study 

To evaluate the contribution of key components (Clustering, Retrieval, and Patho-R1), we conducted an ablation study on 100 randomly selected WSIs from the TCGA-STAD dataset. During preliminary evaluations, we observed a pronounced “length bias”. Specifically, the complete framework (Full) generates highly detailed reports. While clinically informative, this verbosity heavily pe-nalizes precision-based metrics like F1-score. Conversely, configurations lacking fine-grained details achieve spuriously high F1-scores. To objectively measure 8 R. Wang et al. round_1_draft_report.txt 

TCGA-3M-AB47 

[PR ISM (WSI-level 

foundation model)]: Poorly 

differentiated 

adenocarcinoma with signet 

ring cells in the stomach. 

[QCAgent ]: The slide from the stomach shows a poorly 

differentiated adenocarcinoma with a signet ring cell component, 

exhibiting an infiltrative growth pattern. The tumor demonstrates 

invasion into the muscularis propria and extends into the 

subserosal adipose tissue, with lymphovascular invasion 

identified in multiple patch regions. Perineural invasion is 

present, confirmed by tumor infiltration along nerve bundles. 

Desmoplastic stroma is prominent, and a chronic peritumoral 

inflammatory infiltrate is observed. The tumor cells display 

nuclear atypia, hyperchromasia , and loss of polarity, with high 

mitotic activity and focal necrosis noted. A significant component 

of signet ring cells is present, characterized by intracytoplasmic 

mucin displacing the nucleus. The lesion demonstrates 

moderate differentiation in certain areas with partial gland 

formation, but overall exhibits aggressive histological features 

consistent with advanced gastric adenocarcinoma. No 

information is available regarding tumor size, surgical margins, 

lymph node status, or TNM staging. 

[QCAgent (Final report)]: The slide from the body of the stomach 

shows a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with a signet ring 

cell carcinoma component, demonstrating an infiltrative growth 

pattern. The tumor exhibits marked nuclear atypia, 

hyperchromasia , and loss of polarity, with high mitotic activity and 

disorganized glandular structures. A prominent desmoplastic 

stromal reaction is present, accompanied by a chronic peritumoral 

inflammatory infiltrate. Additional features include tumor budding, 

mucin production, and stromal fibrosis. Lymphovascular invasion 

is identified, as evidenced by tumor emboli within lymphatic 

channels. Perineural invasion is present, confirmed by tumor 

infiltration along nerve bundles. The tumor invades through the full 

thickness of the gastric wall, with extension into the subserosal 

adipose tissue. The proximal and distal surgical margins are 

uninvolved by neoplasia. No information is available regarding 

tumor size, lymph node status, or TNM staging. 

Initial Round Quality-Control Rounds T1 Quality-Control Rounds T3 

[Patch Group 1]: This sample is from a gastric 

adenocarcinoma/STAD case. Key features 

include well-formed glandular structures 

(indicative of differentiation), tumor cells invading 

a blood vessel wall (confirming vascular 

invasion), and stromal fibrosis. Nuclear atypia 

and infiltrative growth into vascular structures are 

critical diagnostic findings, supporting a 

diagnosis of invasive gastric adenocarcinoma. 

The vascular invasion in the third slice 

underscores the need for accurate staging. 

[Patch Group 9]: The sample demonstrates 

poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma 

with infiltrative growth into the stroma. Key 

features include disorganized glandular 

structures, nuclear pleomorphism, and stromal 

desmoplasia. The tumor cells exhibit high mitotic 

activity and loss of polarity, consistent with 

aggressive behavior. Immunohistochemistry 

(e.g., CKpan ) would confirm epithelial origin, 

while HER2 testing may guide targeted therapy. 

This pattern aligns with advanced gastric 

adenocarcinoma, requiring staging and 

molecular profiling for optimal management. 

[Query 1]: What is the tumor size in centimeters? 

The sample demonstrates features consistent 

with gastric adenocarcinoma/STAD. Key 

findings include disorganized glandular 

structures with infiltrative growth, nuclear atypia 

(enlarged nuclei, irregular membranes), and 

stromal desmoplasia. The H&E staining reveals 

malignant epithelial cells invading the gastric 

wall, confirming the diagnosis of 

adenocarcinoma. No benign or reactive changes 

are observed in this section. 

x38912_y28672 

x51712_y33280 

x50688_y49664 

x43520_y6144 

[Query 1]: What is the exact tumor size in 

centimeters as measured on the WSI? 

The sample demonstrates gastric foveolar-type 

epithelium with preserved glandular architecture 

and low-grade dysplasia. Key features include 

uniform columnar cells with basally oriented nuclei, 

apical mucin vacuoles, and absence of significant 

nuclear pleomorphism or mitotic activity. The 

findings are consistent with STAD-associated low-

grade dysplasia, necessitating clinical correlation 

and follow-up to monitor progression risk. 

[Query 3]: Is lymphovascular invasion present? If 

so, confirm with evidence. 

The sample demonstrates poorly differentiated 

gastric adenocarcinoma with infiltrative growth, 

nuclear atypia (enlarged nuclei, irregular 

membranes), and desmoplastic stroma. The 

glandular architecture is disrupted, and mitotic 

activity is present. These features align with 

gastric adenocarcinoma/STAD. 

Immunohistochemistry ( CKpan /CDX2) can further 

confirm gastric origin. The diagnosis is consistent 

with poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma, 

likely arising from a background of STAD. 

[Query 5] : What is the status of the proximal and 

distal surgical margins? 

The image demonstrates gastric adenocarcinoma 

with infiltrative growth, characterized by 

disorganized glandular structures, nuclear 

pleomorphism, and stromal desmoplasia. The tumor 

cells exhibit loss of polarity and hyperchromatic 

nuclei, consistent with malignancy. These features, 

combined with the clinical context, confirm gastric 

adenocarcinoma. Further immunohistochemical 

staining (e.g., CK7/CK20, CDX2) could refine the 

subtype, but the morphological evidence strongly 

supports this diagnosis. 

x14336_y44032 

x7680_y61952 

x35840_y9728 

x35840_y44032 

x6144_y62976 

x7680_y43520 

x62464_y25600 

x64000_y10240 

Patch clustering 

[QCAgent ]: The slide from the stomach shows a poorly 

differentiated adenocarcinoma with a signet ring cell 

carcinoma component, demonstrating an infiltrative growth 

pattern. The tumor exhibits nuclear atypia, hyperchromasia ,

pleomorphism, and irregular glandular architecture with loss of 

polarity. Stromal desmoplasia and mitotic activity are present. 

Lymphovascular invasion is identified, confirmed by tumor 

cells within lymphatic channels. The tumor invades into the 

muscularis propria, with evidence of stromal fibrosis and 

chronic inflammatory infiltrate. Desmoplastic stroma and 

peritumoral lymphocytic infiltrate are observed. Tumor budding, 

necrosis, and mucin pools are noted in areas of the lesion. 

The surgical margins, tumor size, depth of invasion beyond 

the muscularis propria, and lymph node status remain 

undetermined. The findings are consistent with invasive 

gastric adenocarcinoma, with features suggestive of 

aggressive behavior. Feedback Summary 

Fig. 3. Case study of the iterative audit–retrieve–revise workflow. Left: WSI thumbnail and patch clustering, with PRISM providing the initial global context. Mid-dle/Right: across QC rounds, QCAgent issues missing-field queries, retrieves support-ing patches, and revises the report, improving completeness while marking non-image-verifiable items as undetermined .

Table 2. Ablation study results using recall-centric metrics on 100 WSIs. Configuration AvgLen R1-Recall R2-Recall RL-Recall BS-Recall FieldRecall Full (Ours) 130 0.5706 0.3061 0.5139 0.3703 0.6690 w/o Retrieval 138 0.5561 0.2652 0.4809 0.3423 0.6440 w/o Patho-R1 98 0.5310 0.2696 0.4495 0.3986 0.7306 

the coverage of core pathological features, we employ recall-centric metrics for this analysis. Ablation experiments confirm that each component is important (Table 2). (a) Removing Patho-R1 (visual feature extraction) module causes the most se-vere performance degradation alongside a significant reduction in report length. This demonstrates the critical role of Patho-R1 in extracting fine-grained histo-logical features. (b) Removing the CONCH retrieval module reduces ROUGE-L Recall by 6.4%. This validates that dynamically retrieving local WSI regions based on missing fields effectively recovers omitted information. 

4 Conclusion 

We present an agentic, quality-controllable framework for WSI-based pathology report generation. Through an audit–retrieve–revise loop with cross-modal patch QCAgent for quality-controllable WSI report generation 9

retrieval and evidence-driven revision, the QCAgent improves completeness while enforcing anti-hallucination constraints that distinguish verifiable findings from administrative items. On TCGA-STAD and an in-house gastric cancer cohort, our method consistently outperforms PRISM across overlap, semantic similarity, and Field Recall in a zero-shot, training-free setting. Future work will add expert evaluation and optimize clinical deployment. 

References 

1. Bai, S., Cai, Y., Chen, R., Chen, K., Chen, X., Cheng, Z., Deng, L., Ding, W., Gao, C., Ge, C., et al.: Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 (2025) 2. Buckley, T.A., Weihrauch, K.R., Latham, K., Zhou, A.Z., Manrai, P.A., Manrai, A.K.: Navigating gigapixel pathology images with large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19652 (2025) 3. Chen, J., Cai, L., Wang, Z., Huang, Y., Jiang, S., Huang, S., Wang, H., Zhang, Y.: Pathagent: Toward interpretable analysis of whole-slide pathology images via large language model-based agentic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17052 (2025) 4. Chen, P., Li, H., Zhu, C., Zheng, S., Shui, Z., Yang, L.: Wsicaption: Multiple instance generation of pathology reports for gigapixel whole-slide images (2024), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16480 

5. Chen, P., Zhu, C., Zheng, S., Li, H., Yang, L.: Wsi-vqa: Interpreting whole slide images by generative visual question answering (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2407.05603 

6. Chen, Q., Hu, Y., Peng, X., Xie, Q., Jin, Q., Gilson, A., Singer, M.B., Ai, X., Lai, P.T., Wang, Z., et al.: Benchmarking large language models for biomedical natural language processing applications and recommendations. Nature Communications 

16 (1), 3280 (2025), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56989-2 

7. Chen, Y., Wang, G., Ji, Y., Li, Y., Ye, J., Li, T., Hu, M., Yu, R., Qiao, Y., He, J.: Slidechat: A large vision-language assistant for whole-slide pathology image understanding. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 5134–5143 (June 2025) 8. Ding, T., Wagner, S.J., Song, A.H., Chen, R.J., Lu, M.Y., Zhang, A., Vaidya, A.J., Jaume, G., Shaban, M., Kim, A., et al.: A multimodal whole-slide foundation model for pathology. Nature Medicine pp. 1–13 (2025) 9. Ghezloo, F., Seyfioglu, M.S., Soraki, R., Ikezogwo, W.O., Li, B., Vivekanandan, T., Elmore, J.G., Krishna, R., Shapiro, L.: Pathfinder: A multi-modal multi-agent sys-tem for medical diagnostic decision-making applied to histopathology. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 23431– 23441 (2025) 10. Guo, Z., Ma, J., Xu, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, L., Chen, H.: Histgen: Histopathol-ogy report generation via local-global feature encoding and cross-modal context interaction (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.05396 

11. Huang, G., Chen, W., Yang, J., Lyu, X., Luo, X., Yang, S., Xing, X., Shen, L.: Survagent: Hierarchical cot-enhanced case banking and dichotomy-based multi-agent system for multimodal survival prediction (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2511.16635 

12. Jaume, G., Oldenburg, L., Vaidya, A., Chen, R.J., Williamson, D.F., Peeters, T., Song, A.H., Mahmood, F.: Transcriptomics-guided slide representation learning in 10 R. Wang et al. computational pathology. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 9632–9644 (2024) 13. Liu, X., Yu, H., Zhang, H., Xu, Y., Lei, X., Lai, H., Gu, Y., Ding, H., Men, K., Yang, K., et al.: Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688 (2023) 14. Lu, M.Y., Chen, B., Williamson, D.F., Chen, R.J., Liang, I., Ding, T., Jaume, G., Odintsov, I., Le, L.P., Gerber, G., et al.: A visual-language foundation model for computational pathology. Nature Medicine 30 (3), 863–874 (2024) 15. Lu, M.Y., Chen, B., Williamson, D.F., Chen, R.J., Zhao, M., Chow, A.K., Ikemura, K., Kim, A., Pouli, D., Patel, A., et al.: A multimodal generative ai copilot for human pathology. Nature 634 (8033), 466–473 (2024) 16. Lyu, X., Liang, Y., Chen, W., Ding, M., Yang, J., Huang, G., Zhang, D., He, X., Shen, L.: WSI-Agents: A Collaborative Multi-Agent System for Multi-Modal Whole Slide Image Analysis . In: proceedings of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2025. vol. LNCS 15964. Springer Na-ture Switzerland (September 2025) 17. Ma, J., Guo, Z., Zhou, F., Wang, Y., Xu, Y., Li, J., Yan, F., Cai, Y., Zhu, Z., Jin, C., et al.: A generalizable pathology foundation model using a unified knowledge distillation pretraining framework. Nature Biomedical Engineering pp. 1–20 (2025) 18. Qin, W., Xu, R., Huang, P., Wu, X., Zhang, H., Luo, L.: What a whole slide image can tell? subtype-guided masked transformer for pathological image captioning (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.20607 

19. Sapkota, R., Roumeliotis, K.I., Karkee, M.: Ai agents vs. agentic ai: A conceptual taxonomy, applications and challenges. Information Fusion p. 103599 (2025) 20. Shaikovski, G., Casson, A., Severson, K., Zimmermann, E., Wang, Y.K., Kunz, J.D., Retamero, J.A., Oakley, G., Klimstra, D., Kanan, C., Hanna, M., Zelechowski, M., Viret, J., Tenenholtz, N., Hall, J., Fusi, N., Yousfi, R., Hamilton, P., Moye, W.A., Vorontsov, E., Liu, S., Fuchs, T.J.: Prism: A multi-modal generative foun-dation model for slide-level histopathology (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2405. 10254 

21. Song, A.H., Chen, R.J., Ding, T., Williamson, D.F., Jaume, G., Mahmood, F.: Morphological prototyping for unsupervised slide representation learning in com-putational pathology. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 11566–11578 (2024) 22. Sun, Y., Si, Y., Zhu, C., Zhang, K., Shui, Z., Ding, B., Lin, T., Yang, L.: Cpathagent: An agent-based foundation model for interpretable high-resolution pathology image analysis mimicking pathologists’ diagnostic logic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20510 (2025) 23. Truhn, D., Azizi, S., Zou, J., Cerda-Alberich, L., Mahmood, F., Kather, J.N.: Ar-tificial intelligence agents in cancer research and oncology. Nature Reviews Cancer pp. 1–14 (2026) 24. Wang, H., Zhao, S., Qiang, Z., Xi, N., Qin, B., Liu, T.: Beyond direct diagno-sis: Llm-based multi-specialist agent consultation for automatic diagnosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16107 (2024) 25. Wang, X., Zhao, J., Marostica, E., Yuan, W., Jin, J., Zhang, J., Li, R., Tang, H., Wang, K., Li, Y., et al.: A pathology foundation model for cancer diagnosis and prognosis prediction. Nature 634 (8035), 970–978 (2024) 26. Xu, H., Usuyama, N., Bagga, J., Zhang, S., Rao, R., Naumann, T., Wong, C., Gero, Z., González, J., Gu, Y., et al.: A whole-slide foundation model for digital pathology from real-world data. Nature 630 (8015), 181–188 (2024) QCAgent for quality-controllable WSI report generation 11 27. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al.: Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025) 28. Zhang, W., Zhang, P., Guo, J., Cheng, T., Chen, J., Zhang, S., Zhang, Z., Yi, Y., Bu, H.: Patho-r1: A multimodal reinforcement learning-based pathology expert reasoner (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11404 

29. Zhao, W., Wu, C., Fan, Y., Qiu, P., Zhang, X., Sun, Y., Zhou, X., Zhang, S., Peng, Y., Wang, Y., et al.: An agentic system for rare disease diagnosis with traceable reasoning. Nature pp. 1–10 (2026)