Title: Scalable integration and prediction of unpaired single-cell and spatial multi-omics via regularized disentanglement

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# Scalable integration and prediction of unpaired single-cell and spatial multi-omics via regularized disentanglement 

Jianle Sun 1,2 , Chaoqi Liang 1, Ran Wei 1, Peng Zheng 1,Hongliang Yan 4, Lei Bai 1, Kun Zhang 2,5 , Wanli Ouyang 1,Peng Ye 1,3* 

1Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, 200232, China. 

2Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 10213, PA, United States of America. 

3The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 999077, China. 

4Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, 510005, China. 

5Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Masdar City Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 

Abstract 

Deciphering cellular states requires methods capable of integrating large-scale heterogeneous single-cell and spatial omics data. However, these data are typ-ically unpaired due to destructive assays and further confounded by modality heterogeneity, technical noise, and immense scale. Here we present scMRDR, a scalable computational framework based on regularized disentangled represen-tation learning for integrating fully unpaired single-cell and spatial multi-omics datasets. Built on a unified and structure-preserving architecture, scMRDR removes the need for pairing supervision while maintaining computational effi-ciency, enabling scaling to large datasets spanning multiple disparate omics modalities. Across diverse real-world benchmarks, scMRDR demonstrates strong performance in batch correction, modality alignment, and biological signal preser-vation. The framework further supports cross-modal translation across omics modalities and enables spatial coordinate imputation for non-spatial single-cell datasets using a reference atlas. The resulting spatial mapping allows spatially resolved analyses, including identification of spatially variable genes and char-acterization of epigenetic regulatory programs in their native tissue context. 

> Early version of this work has been presented as a Spotlight Paper on The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) [1].

1

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint These capabilities position scMRDR as a scalable and versatile framework for large-scale multi-omics integration.  

> Keywords: single-cell and spatial omics, multi-omics integration, spatial imputation, gene regulation, representation learning, scalability

## 1 Introduction 

Deciphering cellular identity and function requires a holistic picture that captures the complex interplay across distinct molecular layers. The rapid development of sequencing technologies in single-cell and spatial multi-omics has enabled the profil-ing of diverse molecular characteristics, ranging from transcriptomic landscapes and chromatin accessibility to protein abundance and spatial architecture. However, the destructive nature of most sequencing protocols necessitates measuring different omics data in separate cell populations, resulting in datasets that are completely unpaired [2]. This problem is further exacerbated by the inherent heterogeneity of omics modalities, the pervasive technical noise, and the burgeoning scale of contemporary datasets [3– 5]. Integrating these disparate measurements into a coherent understanding of cellular states remains challenging. Existing multi-omics integration methods attempt to translate these disparate omics data into a unified cell representation but remain limited in key regimes. Joint dimensionality-reduction frameworks [6] and deep generative models [7] often rely on paired or partially paired observations [8, 9] or prior correspondence information [10, 11], restricting their applicability to unpaired real-world scenarios. Alternative approaches based on manifold alignment [12, 13] or optimal transport (OT) [14, 15] typically require the computation of global cell-cell coupling matrices, which not only restricts to dual-modality integration but also introduces prohibitive computa-tional overhead. As a result, a computational framework that can integrate massive, increasingly complex, and completely unpaired single-cell multi-omics datasets while preserving biological structure remains lacking. Here, we introduce scMRDR (single-cell Multi-omics Regularized Disentangled Representations), a scalable computational framework designed to integrate com-pletely unpaired single-cell and spatial multi-omics datasets (Fig. 1a). scMRDR leverages a unified β-variational autoencoder to disentangle each cell’s latent represen-tation into a modality-shared component that captures shared biological signals, and a modality-specific component that models modality-dependent variation. To ensure that the modality-shared component is well aligned across modalities while remaining biologically faithful, scMRDR couples an adversarial regularization loss for cross-omics alignment with an isomeric regularization loss designed to preserve intrinsic cellular structure. Further, a masked reconstruction objective is designed to facilitate princi-pled learning from the missing or non-overlapping features ubiquitous in multi-omics data. Its unified, structure-preserving architecture allows scMRDR to eliminate the need for pairing information, reduce computational overhead, and scale to massive single-cell and spatial multi-omics datasets. 2

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Across benchmark datasets with varying scales and modalities, scMRDR shows excellent and robust performance in batch correction, modality alignment, and biolog-ical signal preservation (Fig.1b). Besides, it further enables cross-omics translation like predicting chromatin accessibility from gene expression (Fig.1c), and spatial coordi-nate imputation for dissociated single-cell data with spatial reference atlases (Fig.1d). Crucially, by transforming separate omics layers into pseudo-paired data, scMRDR enables spatially informed downstream analyses, including the identification of spa-tially variable molecular features and the statistically rigorous dissection of epigenetic regulation effects within native tissue contexts (Fig.1e). In particular, spatial mixed-effects model based on our integrated pseudo-pairs reveals distinct and complementary spatial epigenetic regulatory landscapes, highlighting differential associations of DNA methylation with stable cellular identity and dynamic gene expression programs. Together, scMRDR provides a computational bridge from disparate multi-omics mea-surements to unified cell representations. As increasingly comprehensive and complex single-cell and spatial multi-omics datasets become available, scMRDR offers a flexible and scalable framework that advances integrative biological discovery. 

## 2 Results 

2.1 Overview of scMRDR for unparied multi-omics integration 

To address the challenge of integrating completely unpaired single-cell datasets, we developed scMRDR, a scalable generative framework (Fig.1a). The model is built upon a unified β-variational autoencoder ( β-VAE) that utilizes a single encoder-decoder architecture to process all modalities, which disentangles the cellular state of each sample into a common, modality-invariant latent space ( zu) and multiple modality-specific latent spaces ( zs). A key innovation of our approach is to ensure that the common zu space is both well-aligned across omics and simultaneously preserves the intrinsic biological structure of the data. We achieve this by introducing two special-ized regularizations. First, an adversarial regularization loss aligns the zu distributions from different omics by training the VAE encoder to “fool” a modality discrimina-tor. Second, an isomeric regularization loss acts as a structure-preserving regularizer, compelling the shared zu subspace to retain the topological (e.g., pairwise distance) information present in the full, combined latent space z = ( zu, zs). Besides, in order to address the sparsity and feature mismatch characteristic of real-world multi-omics data, a masked reconstruction loss is further introduced, with either a gaussian or a ZINB loss function [7] employed according to the distribution of each omics modality. The resulting unified and structure-preserving embeddings zu further enable robust downstream analyses, including multi-omics integration (Fig.1b), cross-omics trans-lation (Fig.1c), spatial reconstruction (Fig.1d), and epigenetic regulation analysis (Fig.1e). 3  

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Single-cell
> omics
> Chromatin accessibility
> Surface protein
> Gene
> Peak
> Protein-coding gene
> Gene activity score
> Masks on unmeasured
> features
> Gene-level
> Feature
> Modality
> index
> Decoder
> 𝒑(𝒙|𝒛)
> Modality-specific
> component 𝑧 ௦
> Modality-shared
> component 𝑧 ௨
> 𝜷 -VAE
> Masked
> reconstruction loss
> for unmeasured
> features
> Adversarial regularization
> Gene
> Encoder
> 𝒒(𝒛|𝒙, 𝒎)
> Isometric regularization
> Distance
> structure Modality-
> shared
> component
> Full latent
> space
> Preserve
> Modality-shared
> component
> Discriminator
> Fool
> Generator
> (𝜷 -VAE)
> Reconstruction
> Imputed
> spatial
> locations
> Feature matrix
> Feature matrix
> Spatial locations
> Gene expression
> Spatial
> omics
> Integrated
> embeddings

batch correction 

modality alignment 

biological conservation         

> Integrated
> embeddings
> OT/kNN
> translation
> Global
> Regulation
> 𝜷𝑿 +𝜷 𝟎
> Cell-Type
> Specificity
> 𝒃 𝒁 𝑿 +𝒃 𝟎𝒁
> Spatial
> Context
> 𝒖 (𝒍 𝒙 ,𝒍 𝒚 )
> Pseudo-
> pairing
> a. Model architecture
> b. multi-omics integration c. Cross-omics translation d. Spatial reconstruction e. Regulation effect assessment
> Output cell
> embedding
> Unpaired
> multi-omics

Fig. 1 Overview of the proposed scalable computational framework scMRDR, which serves as a powerful tool to integrate unpaired single-cell and spatial multi-omics data. a. Model architecture. scMRDR employs a well-designed β-VAE to disentangle modality-shared and modality-specific latent components from unpaired multi-omics data. Meanwhile, adversarial regularization and isometric regularization respectively enforce effective modality alignment and biological structure preservation, while masked reconstruction objective mitigates feature mismatch and data sparsity. b. Multi-omics integration. By mapping unpaired omics data into a unified latent space while preserving biological signals, scMRDR enables robust batch correction, modality alignment, and biological conservation. 

c. Cross-omics translation. By generating unified and structure-preserving embeddings, scMRDR enables accurate translation across modalities and robust imputation of missing omics features. d. 

Spatial reconstruction. By integrating spatial reference data with non-spatial single-cell profiles, scMRDR accurately infer spatial coordinates for dissociated cells. e. Epigenetic regulation analysis. Leveraging spatially resolved multi-omics landscape, scMRDR enables precise characterization of epi-genetic regulatory effects through mixed-effects modeling. 

2.2 scMRDR effectively integrates unpaired scRNA and scATAC data while preserving biological structures 

To comprehensively assess the performance of scMRDR, we benchmarked it against nine existing methods: Seurat v5 [16], Harmony [17], scVI [7], scGLUE [10], JAMIE [11], UnionCom [12], Pamona [15], MaxFuse [18], and SIMBA [19], where scVI can be regarded as a baseline counterpart, as it represents a similar generative approach but lacks the disentanglement and regularization components of our model. The comparison was first performed on a public unpaired dataset of human kidney tissue [20], which includes scRNA-seq data (19,985 cells profiling 27,146 genes) and 4

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint scATAC-seq data (24,205 cells profiling 99,019 peaks). For scMRDR, scATAC-seq peak signals were aggregated to gene-level activity scores via episcanpy [21] to generate an aligned multi-omics feature matrix. These scores were also used for integration by Seurat, Harmony, and scVI, while the remaining methods utilize raw peak signals as input. The union of highly variable genes identified from each modality served as the input feature space for all methods. We conducted a detailed evaluation using multiple scib-based metrics [22]. The results demonstrate that scMRDR substantially outperforms the competing methods, showing superior performance in modality integration, biological signal conserva-tion (bio-conservation), and batch correction (Fig.2a, d, Supplementary Fig.S1, S2). Notably, scMRDR produced well-separated embedding clusters that correspond to distinct cell types in an unsupervised manner, confirming the preservation of underly-ing biological heterogeneity. Simultaneously, samples originating from different omics and technical batches were effectively fused and aligned within the latent space, indi-cating successful correction of both modality-specific variations and technical noise. In contrast, while several other methods (e.g., Harmony, scVI, and JAMIE) could preserve some biological differences between cell types, they failed to properly inte-grate the global distributions of the two omics modalities. Systematic ablation studies and sensitivity analyses further verify the function/contribution of each regularization component in the model (Supplementary Table S2). 

2.3 scMRDR scales to large datasets and integrates triple-omic profiles 

To validate the scalability of scMRDR, we then evaluated its performance on a large-scale dataset from the mouse primary motor cortex, comprising 69,727 cells (27,123 genes) profiled by scRNA-seq and 54,844 cells (148,814 peaks) by scATAC-seq [23]. Notably, several methods based on OT or other global unsupervised manifold alignment (e.g., JAMIE, UnionCom, and Pamona) fail to run on data of this scale due to memory or optimization errors. We therefore compared scMRDR against the remaining methods. Crucially, we observe that some methods that perform ade-quately on smaller datasets, suffer significant performance drops on this larger dataset (Fig.2a, Supplementary Fig.S1, S3). For example, GLUE’s performance exhibits a strong susceptibility to preprocessing dimension reduction strategies, which are them-selves markedly dependent on data scale. In contrast, bypassing the need for explicit preprocessing dimension reduction, scMRDR maintains stable and robust perfor-mance, confirming its high scalability for large-level single-cell data integration and its capacity to provide valuable biological insights (Fig.2b, e). We further demonstrated the remarkable capacity of scMRDR by integrating more than two modalities, a feature not supported by most existing methods. We conducted a case study integrating scRNA-seq, scATAC-seq, and sc-protein levels measured by CITE-seq from a human bone marrow benchmark dataset [24]. This integration involved 30,486 cells (13,431 genes) in transcriptome, 10,330 cells (116,490 peaks) in epigenome, and 18,052 cells (134 surface proteins) in proteome. We applied a masked loss function to accommodate the severe feature missingness inherent in the proteomics measurements, and ablation study confirm its benefits (Supplementary Table S3). 5                                                 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint score=0.74 score=0.70 score=0.52 score=0.73 score=0.74 score=0.42 score=0.75 score=0.50 score=0.29
> score=0.66 score=0.64 score=0.50 Seurat GLUE Ours
> Seurat GLUE Ours score=0.59 score=0.68 score=0.53 score=0.68 score=0.60 score=0.62 score=0.62 score=0.56 score=0.55 score=0.59 score=0.49 score=0.55
> Ours GLUE scVI score=0.49 score=0.69 score=0.61 score=0.39 score=0.55 score=0.58 score=0.67 score=0.58 score=0.36 score=0.58 score=0.38 score=0.49 Ours GLUE scVI MaxFuse Seurat Pamona JAMIE SIMBA Harmony UnionCom
> Method Batch correction Bio conservation Modality integration Total Aggregate score 0.52 0.74 0.70 0.66 0.42 0.73 0.74 0.64 0.52 0.65 0.47 0.56 0.31 0.69 0.62 0.56 0.29 0.75 0.50 0.54 0.58 0.47 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.47 0.42 0.48 0.73 0.35 0.35 0.46 0.34 0.62 0.37 0.46 0.41 0.47 0.36 0.42

two-omics integration                             

> Ours Seurat GLUE_lsi scVI Harmony GLUE_pca MaxFuse SIMBA
> Method Batch correction Bio conservation Modality integration Total Aggregate score 0.56 0.62 0.62 0.60 0.53 0.68 0.53 0.59 0.55 0.59 0.49 0.55 0.52 0.57 0.50 0.54 0.45 0.54 0.37 0.46 0.47 0.49 0.37 0.45 0.46 0.41 0.42 0.43 0.51 0.35 0.38 0.41

b. large-scale two-omics integration a.                 

> Ours GLUE scVI Harmony
> Method Batch correction Bio conservation Modality integration Total Aggregate score 0.39 0.69 0.61 0.58 0.36 0.67 0.58 0.55 0.49 0.58 0.38 0.49 0.29 0.48 0.18 0.33

c. triple-omics integration Fig. 2 The proposed scMRDR framework achieves robust and scalable integration across increas-ingly challenging multi-omics integration settings. Unscaled scIB benchmark metrics and UMAP visualizations demonstrate that scMRDR consistently achieves superior or balanced performance in biological conservation (cell-type structure preservation), modality alignment, and batch correction across standard two-omics ( a), large-scale two-omics ( b), and challenging triple-omics ( c) integration tasks. Detailed values of scIB metrics are shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. Visualizations of repre-sentative competing methods like GLUE, Seurat, and scVI are shown, while the remaining methods are shown in Supplementary Fig. S2-S4. 

Methods that rely on dual-modality bridge integration, such as Seurat v5, are not suit-able for the triple omics integration task and were excluded. We hence benchmarked scMRDR against the remaining methods that support triple-omics integration, includ-ing GLUE, scVI, and Harmony. The results show that scMRDR yields a consistently excellent performance in this multi-modal integration task (Fig.2c). Conversely, other methods fail to align well the latent distributions across all three omics, struggling par-ticularly when one modality (proteomics) possessed significantly fewer features than the others (Fig.2c, f, Supplementary Fig.S1, S4). 6

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint UMAP1 UMAP2 RNA (true) CD4 Naive CD4 TCM CD4 TEM CD8 Naive CD8 TEM_1 CD8 TEM_2 CD14 Mono CD16 Mono HSPC Intermediate B MAIT Memory B NK Naive B Plasma Treg cDC gdT pDC UMAP1 UMAP2 RNA (scMRDR + OT prediction) CD4 Naive CD4 TCM CD4 TEM CD8 Naive CD8 TEM_1 CD8 TEM_2 CD14 Mono CD16 Mono HSPC Intermediate B MAIT Memory B NK Naive B Plasma Treg cDC gdT pDC UMAP1 UMAP2 RNA (scMRDR + KNN prediction) CD4 Naive CD4 TCM CD4 TEM CD8 Naive CD8 TEM_1 CD8 TEM_2 CD14 Mono CD16 Mono HSPC Intermediate B MAIT Memory B NK Naive B Plasma Treg cDC gdT pDC UMAP1 UMAP2 ATAC (true) CD4 Naive CD4 TCM CD4 TEM CD8 Naive CD8 TEM_1 CD8 TEM_2 CD14 Mono CD16 Mono HSPC Intermediate B MAIT Memory B NK Naive B Plasma Treg cDC gdT pDC UMAP1 UMAP2 ATAC (scMRDR + OT prediction) CD4 Naive CD4 TCM CD4 TEM CD8 Naive CD8 TEM_1 CD8 TEM_2 CD14 Mono CD16 Mono HSPC Intermediate B MAIT Memory B NK Naive B Plasma Treg cDC gdT pDC UMAP1 UMAP2 ATAC (scMRDR + KNN prediction) CD4 Naive CD4 TCM CD4 TEM CD8 Naive CD8 TEM_1 CD8 TEM_2 CD14 Mono CD16 Mono HSPC Intermediate B MAIT Memory B NK Naive B Plasma Treg cDC gdT pDC 

a. 

b. Fig. 3 scMRDR enables accurate cross-modality prediction. a. UMAP visualizations comparing ground-truth omics profiles with predictions generated by optimal transport (OT) and k-nearest neighbors (kNN). OT-based prediction preserves cell-type topology and global manifold structure, whereas kNN-based prediction introduces structural distortions. b. Cell-type-specific quantitative evaluation showing pearson correlation between observed and predicted mean expression levels across genes, demonstrating consistently high accuracy for scMRDR across modalities. Each scatter repre-sents the prediction correlation on one gene. 

2.4 scMRDR enables accurate cross-omics translation and prediction 

The unified and structure-preserving embeddings produced by scMRDR are not an end in themselves, but rather a powerful foundation for critical downstream biologi-cal inquiries. For example, the integrated representation enables robust cross-modal translation. By learning a coupling matrix (via OT or kNN) between the latent embed-dings of two modalities, scMRDR can accurately impute the profile of one omic from another (e.g., predicting chromatin accessibility from gene expression and verse visa). We validated the model’s cross-omics translation and prediction capabilities on a paired 10x Multiome [2] (scRNA-seq + scATAC-seq) dataset with 9631 human PBMC cells as the ground truth is available here. We randomly split the entire dataset into two halves: the first half retained only the scRNA-seq measurements, and the second half retained only the scATAC-seq measurements, resulting in an unpaired multi-omics dataset. We used scMRDR to first learn a unified representation for this combined 7

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint dataset. Subsequently, we conducted OT and weighted KNN on the learned integrated representation, respectively, to further learn the sample coupling between the two omics and predict the missing omics for each sample, which was then compared to the measured ground truth. scMRDR demonstrates superior cross-omic predictive performance through similar topological distribution between ground truth and predictions (Fig.3a), as well as the high Pearson correlation coefficients (Fig.3b, Supplementary Fig.S5). Specifically, OT surpasses kNN by leveraging global rather than local topological features, resulting in predictions that accurately align with the ground truth distributions, while kNN remains a highly tractable and practical approximation for large-scale applications. 

2.5 scMRDR imputes spatial locations for single-cell omics and enhances SVG discovery 

Moving beyond single-cell omics to spatial omics, scMRDR demonstrates that its util-ity is not limited to translating molecular profiles, but also encompasses the prediction of single-cell spatial coordinates. To empirically show that, We integrated scRNA [23], scATAC [23], and spatial transcriptomics (merFISH) [25] of mouse primary motor cor-tex using our method, and then used the aligned latent representation to interpolate the missing spatial locations in single-cell data by OT. We implemented OT with both entropy-regularized Sinkhorn (Fig.4a) and original EMD algorithms (Supplementary Fig.S6b, S7b), and the spatial visualizations consistently show that this interpolation performs well, where inferred locations of cells align well with the provided cortex layers annotations. Due to the low coverage of merFISH (only 254 genes measured), only 103 genes are detected as spatial variable genes (SVGs) by SPARK-X [26] ( Padj < 10 −20 ). We leveraged the spatially interpolated scRNA data (26069 genes) and 4095 SVGs ( Padj <

10 −20 ) are detected. We replicated 83 out of 101 SVGs detectable by merFISH (like 

Cux2 , Lamb5 , Unc5d ) (Fig.4c, d), and also revealed new SVGs (like Hs3st4 , Cpa6 ,

Zfpm2 ) (Fig.4d, Supplementary Fig.S9). Similarly, using scATAC with imputed spatial locations, we identified 142 SVGs in gene activity scores ( Padj < 10 −20 ), including several key transcription factors like Unc5d , Gpc5 , Sntg2 , Nrp2 (Fig.4e, Supplementary Fig.S10). This will further support the investigation of spatially specific regulatory mechanisms. For example, the Unc5d gene, encoding a member of the UNC-5 family of netrin receptors, demonstrates a highly specific spatial pattern, strongly concentrated in Layer 4 (L4), specific primary sensory areas of the neocortex including primary somatosensory cortex (S1), the primary visual cortex (V1), and the primary auditory cortex (A1), which suggests its crucial role in the development and maturation of sen-sory cortical circuits [27]. The Zfpm2 gene (also known as Fog2 ) exhibits a highly specific spatial distribution in the mouse cerebral cortex, primarily functioning as a key molecular marker for Layer 6. Its expression is largely restricted to the deepest cortical layer, where it is essential for the proper differentiation of corticothalamic projection neurons (CThPNs), playing a particularly critical role in regulating the identity and axonal projections of CThPN subsets within the motor cortex [28]. 8

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 4 scMRDR integrates spatial transcriptomics with non-spatial multi-omics to reconstruct spa-tial architecture. a. Visualization of the reference merFISH slice alongside scMRDR-imputed spatial mappings of dissociated scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq profiles, colored by cell type, illustrating recovery of large-scale spatial organization. b. The top five conserved Spatially Variable Genes (SVGs) identi-fied in both the original merFISH reference and the imputed scRNA-seq data, visualized in the native merFISH spatial coordinates. c. Visualization of the same conserved SVGs on the scMRDR-imputed scRNA-seq spatial map, demonstrating consistent spatial expression patterns between reference and imputed data. d. Additional SVGs identified from the scMRDR-imputed scRNA-seq spatial map under the same statistical criteria, highlighting candidate spatial patterns not detected in the refer-ence dataset. e. SVGs inferred from gene activity scores in the scMRDR-imputed scATAC-seq spatial map, indicating that spatial variability can be extended to chromatin accessibility-derived signals. Together, these results show that scMRDR enables spatial mapping of non-spatial single-cell multi-omics data and supports downstream spatially informed analyses, including the characterization of spatially variable molecular programs. 

9

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2.6 scMRDR integrates structurally heterogeneous omics to elucidate the spatial epigenetic regulation landscape via mixed-effects modeling 

To further demonstrate scMRDR’s performance in integrating multi-omics data with distinct resolutions and more heterogeneous data structures, we integrated gene expressions (scRNA-seq), DNA methylation ratios measured by single-nucleus methy-lation sequencing (snmC-seq) on both CG (mCG) and non-CG (mCH) sites [29], and spot-resolution 10x Visium spatial transcriptomics data from mouse frontal cortex. The 10x Visium spots serve as a spatial reference for interpolating single-cell RNA expression and DNA methylation ratio data. Our spatial interpolation results accu-rately map different cell types to their corresponding cortical layers, similar to the effect achieved by SIMO [30]. However, while SIMO requires multi-step integration and explicitly utilizes pre-acquired cell type labels, we achieve a completely unsupervised, unified integration of multiple modalities, adapted to the vast and increasingly ubiq-uitous volumes of unannotated data. This is particularly crucial for emerging omics modalities lacking sufficient reference atlases, where their annotations typically need to be derived through the unsupervised alignment with well-characterized reference modalities. This spatially resolved integration of transcriptomic and epigenomic data further empowers the investigation of regulatory effects underlying the spatial heterogeneity of gene expression. We aggregated and aligned the spatially imputed scRNA-seq and snmC-seq data according to their spatial coordinates to generate pseudo-paired mul-tiome data. Leveraging a Spatial Generalized Additive Mixed Model (SGAMM) to account for spatial autocorrelation and cell-type heterogeneity, we dissected the epi-genetic regulation of gene expression in the mouse prefrontal cortex (Fig.5b-e). Our analysis reveals a pervasive repressive landscape, where DNA methylation, particularly in the non-CG context (mCH), shows a robust negative association with gene expres-sion. This transcriptional silencing effect is most pronounced in canonical interneuron markers such as Sst , Pvalb , and Dlx5 , aligning with recent single-cell methylome atlases which establish mCH accumulation as a critical hallmark of neuronal maturation and lineage specification [23, 31]. The strong signal detected in the mixed model under-scores the role of mCH not merely as a transient regulator, but as a stable epigenetic mechanism that enforces cellular identity by silencing lineage-inappropriate genes. Notably, comparing these results with a cell-type fixed-effect model (SGAM, Sup-plementary Fig.S11) provides critical mechanistic nuance. For instance, the strong signal observed for Olig2 in the mixed model (Fig.5b) was effectively ablated in the fixed-effect model (Supplementary Fig.S11). This indicates that the Olig2 signal is largely driven by broad compositional differences between cell types (i.e., the stark contrast in methylation profiles between oligodendrocytes and neurons) rather than intra-cell-type regulation. The attenuation of such signals in the fixed-effect model is consistent with the interpretation that the strong methylation-expression coupling observed globally is substantially driven by compositional differences between cell types rather than dynamic intra-cell-type tuning. This distinction is consistent with the “genomic barrier” hypothesis, where methylation (particularly mCH) landscapes may function as a stable marker of cellular identity established during development 10 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 5 scMRDR integrates spot-base spatial omics and single-cell data for spatial reconstruction and mechanistic dissection of the epigenetic landscape. a. Visualization of the reference 10x visium spots and scMRDR-imputed spatial distributions of scRNA-seq, snmC-mCG, and snmC-mCH pro-files, which reveals consistent laminar and regional organization across modalities. b-c. Identification of spatially associated epigenetic signals using Spatial Generalized Additive Mixed Model (SGAMM). Volcano plots show the fixed-effect coefficients ( β) and corresponding statistical significance (-log10 FDR) for mCG (b) and mCH (c) sites, after controlling for cell-type composition and spatial auto-correlation. d-e. Genome-wide landscapes of spatially associated epigenetic regulation. Manhattan plots summarize spatial association statistics across chromosomes for mCG (d) and mCH (e), with prominent peaks corresponding to genes with significant epigenetic regulation effect, where the red dashed line indicates the significance threshold P = 1 e − 5 since thousands of genes are included. 

11 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint to restrict cell fate, rather than acting as rapid transcriptional switches in the mature brain [29, 32]. 

2.7 scMRDR enables efficient cross-species atlas-scale integration 

Finally, to further demonstrate the feasibility of scMRDR on atlas-scale data, we integrated a cross-species scRNA dataset comprising a total of 610,718 brain cells from primary frontal cortex of human, macaque, marmoset, and chimpanzee [33], where gene names of homologous genes have been harmonized. Similar to experiments above, the integration was performed in a fully unsupervised manner without using any explicit cell-type annotations. The results (Supplementary Fig.S13) show that similar cells across different species are well integrated at the level of cell subtypes, demonstrating the model’s excellent ability to achieve accurate and biologically meaningful cross-species integration. Beyond showing its scalability to massive atlas, this also suggests that scMRDR can serve as a robust and powerful framework for annotating reference-poor species and decoding the evolutionary conservation of specific cell types. 

## 3 Discussion 

Translating highly disparate multi-omics data into a holistic cellular picture is essen-tial in understanding the complex regulatory networks that govern cellular identity, function, and spatial organization. In this study, we introduce scMRDR, a scalable generative framework for integrating multiple completely unpaired single-cell omics datasets. A fundamental challenge in unpaired integration lies in aligning modalities robustly while preserving fine-grained biological structure, such as rare cell states and subtle subtype variation. Many existing approaches depend on explicit pairing infor-mation [8, 9], which is often unavailable when datasets are generated independently, or rely on computationally intensive global coupling strategies that scale poorly in large atlas-level settings [12–15]. Several recent studies [34–36] have begun exploring latent-space decomposition strategies for integration. However, many such approaches still rely on partial pairing supervision, stacked modality-specific encoders, or cross-modal contrastive objectives, which can limit scalability and flexibility in fully unpaired, multi-omics scenarios. In contrast, scMRDR addresses these challenges through a unified β-VAE archi-tecture equipped with a dual-regularization scheme. Specifically, scMRDR adopts a single encoder-decoder architecture under a unified β-VAE framework, treating obser-vations from different omics layers as instances within a shared generative model. Additionally, an adversarial objective is used to align the shared latent representations (zu) across modalities, while an isometric regularization term constrains this shared space to preserve the intrinsic topological structure encoded in the full latent space. Together with a masked reconstruction loss that accommodates non-overlapping fea-ture spaces, this design enables robust cross-modal alignment without requiring paired cells or explicit global cell-cell correspondence maps, making it a flexible and scalable framework across completely unpaired datasets spanning multiple omics modalities. 12 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The utility of this integrated embedding is demonstrated in two key downstream tasks: cross-modal imputation and spatial coordinate imputation. The latter is partic-ularly impactful. Firstly, imputing the spatial location of scRNA-seq data will greatly alleviate the limitations of traditional spatial transcriptomics methods in terms of res-olution (e.g., Visium) or sequencing coverage (e.g., MERFISH). This makes it possible to quantify the spatial expression of a larger number of genes at single-cell resolution, benefiting further spatial analysis like SVGs detection. Secondly, and more impor-tantly, this imputation method effectively expands the multi-omics horizon of spatial genomics for omics types where spatial location is currently difficult to measure, such as scATAC-seq and single-cell methylation. This allows for the spatial heterogeneity of more transcriptional regulatory processes to be revealed. We showed that by imputing spatial locations for non-spatial scRNA-seq and snmc-seq data, scMRDR enables the application of advanced statistical models such as SGAMM, incorporating cell-type-specific effects and confoundings like spatial auto-correlations. This specific application highlights a critical advance: the ability to move beyond simple data harmonization to a framework that allows for rigorous statistical testing of biological hypotheses (e.g., the effect of DNA methylation on mRNA expres-sion). This approach explicitly corrects for complex confounders, such as continuous spatial autocorrelation and cell-type-specific heterogeneity, which are often ignored in standard analyses. Despite its excellent performance, scMRDR has some limitations. First, although the disentanglement between zu and zs is encouraged by the β-VAE objective and additional regularization terms, it is not theoretically guaranteed to be exact. Second, the isometric loss treats the full latent representation z learned by the VAE as a surrogate for the “true” underlying data structure; however, this structure is itself model-dependent and may introduce additional bias and unstable posterior. Finally, the selection of hyperparameters for different loss components (e.g., β, λ, and γ) may require careful tuning, particularly when integrating highly heterogeneous datasets. Looking forward, extending the framework to accommodate more diverse data modalities represents an important avenue for future research. In particular, integrat-ing heterogeneous formats, such as gene 3D structures, genetic association signals (e.g. GWAS and eQTL) [37] or cell-cell interaction graphs [38] with conventional single-cell omics matrices would substantially broaden the scope of cross-modal biological discovery. n addition, systematic characterization of cellular responses to chemical perturbations and genetic interventions across multiple omics layers [39, 40] calls for principled and flexible methodologies that can align disparate modalities while preserving perturbation-specific heterogeneity. In summary, scMRDR offers a flexible, scalable and robust solution for unpaired multi-omics integration. By constructing a unified and structure-preserving latent space, it provides a foundation for a wide range of downstream analyses, promot-ing to bridge large-scale data integration with spatially informed and mechanistically grounded modeling of gene regulatory programs. 13 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## 4 Methods 

4.1 scMRDR for unpaired multi-omics integration 

Key idea. We aim to achieve the latent space disentanglement with a generative model designed for single-cell multi-omics. We implement a unified β-VAE composed of a single encoder-decoder, treating observations in different omics equally as a single sample, thereby ensuring flexibility and scalability in completely unpaired data across multiple omics. Theoratically, such disentangled subspaces are unidentifiable (i.e., not unique) without additional constraints [41]. We leverage this unidentifiability and, by imposing isometric and adversarial regularization, constrain the modality-shared subspace to be the one that preserves the maximum sample structure information from the entire space while aligning different modalities. 

Generative model for multi-omics data with disentangled latent space. To achieve flexible and scalable integration, we propose a generative model tailored for single-cell multi-omics data (Fig.1a). We assume that observations x(m) in the omics 

m are generated from latent embeddings lying in two independent subspaces, i.e., com-mon latent variables zu shared across modalities and modality-specific latent variables 

z(m) 

> s

distributional distinctly for different modalities. Then we have 

p(z|m) = p(zu)p(zs|m), (1) and 

p(x|m, c) = p(x|z, c)p(x|m)p(m)p(c) = p(x|z, c)cp(zu)p(zs|m), (2) where c represents other covariates. In particular, batch effects are systematic varia-tions introduced by non-biological factors, including differences in experimental runs, reagent lots, or operators. These effects can obscure true biological signals or intro-duce spurious patterns in the data [5]. To mitigate such confounding influences, batch information is commonly included as a covariate in the modeling process. Thanks to the central dogma, sequencing reads of mRNA, protein, epigenomic features, and other omics data can all be mapped to the gene level, such as gene activity scores derived from peak aggregation in scATAC-seq, and methylation scores by averaging ratios across all methylation sites within a gene body. For sparse count data with over-dispersion (i.e., the variance exceeds the mean) and dropouts, we parametrize the generative process p(x|z, c) using a zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) distribution [7, 42], i.e., 

xng ∼ πg δ0 + (1 − πng )NB( lnρng , r g ) d

= ZINB( lnρng , r g , π g ), (3) where δ0 is point mass at zero, ln represents the library size of cell n, ρng is the mean proportion of the corresponding measurement (RNA expressions, activity score, protein level, etc.) of gene g in cell n, rg is the dispersion factor of gene g, πng is the dropout rate of gene g in cell n. Inspired by scVI [7], we parametrize the non-linear neural networks as follows h = fh(z, c), ρ ng = fρ(h), π ng = fπ (h). When normalized profiles or z-scores or more non-count data (like DNA methylation ratios) included, we can change to a simple Gaussian decoder with xng ∼ N (ρng , σ 2 

> g

). 14 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We employ β-VAE [43], an variant of classcial variational autoencoders (VAEs) [44] by introducing a hyperparameter β to upweight the KL divergence term in the VAE objective, to model the generative process and encourage disentanglement. Prior distributions of latent factors z are assumed as isotropic multivariate Gaussian distri-butions, i.e., p(zs|m) d

= N (μm, σ 2

> m

I) and p(zu|t) d

= N (0 , I). We employ variational posteriors q(zu|x) = μu(x) + σu(x) ⊙ N (0 , I) and q(zs|x, m ) = μs(x, m ) + σs(x, m ) ⊙N (0 , I) to approximate the prior, and the loss function (negative ELBO) of β-VAE is 

Lβ-VAE = −ELBO = Lrecon + βLKL 

= −Ez∼q(z|x,m ) log p(x|z, c) + β [KL( q(zu|x)∥p(zu)) + KL( q(zs|x, m )∥p(zs|m))] ,

(4) where β > 1 to encourage the disentanglement of zu and zs. For the ZINB model, the reconstruction loss, i.e., the expected log likelihood under the variational posterior, is 

Ez∼q(z|x,m ) log p(x|z, c) = 1

N

PNn=1 

PGg=1 log PZINB (xn; lnρng , r g , π ng ), (5) where PZINB (X = x; μ, r, π ) = πIx=0 + (1 − π)PNB (x; μ, r ), and PNB (x; μ, r ) stands for the probability mass of negative binomial distribution N B (μ, r ) at x, i.e., 

PNB (x; μ, r ) = Γ( x+r)

> x! Γ( r)

 rr+μ

r  μr+μ

x

.

Adversarial regularization for omics integration. To further encourage the alignment of distributions of z(m) 

> u

from different omics, we impose an additional adver-sarial regularities [45, 46] by introducing a m-class discriminator D(zu) : Rdu →{0, 1, . . . , m } to distinguish zu of samples from different omics and try to optimize its capacity, i.e., min  

> D

Ldiscriminator = min 

> D

"

− X

> m

m log( D(z(m) 

> u

)

#

, z(m) 

> u

∼ q(zu|x), (6) while training the VAE encoders q(zu|x) to fool the discriminator as much as possible by optimizing in the opposite direction max  

> q(zu|x)

inf  

> D

Ldiscriminator , (7) which is equivalent to min  

> q(zu|x)

Lalignment = min  

> q(zu|x)

sup 

> D

"X

> m

m log 



D(z(m) 

> u

)

#

, (8) achieving a proper alignment of embeddings from different omics ultimately. 

Isometric loss for structure preservation. To ensure that zu captures the bio-logical heterogeneity among cell populations (e.g., cell types and cell states), we introduce an additional unsupervised structure-preserving regularization, since true 15 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cell-type labels or annotations are typically unavailable. Though the original feature matrices are high-dimensional, the full latent representation z = ( zu, zs) learned by the generative model effectively preserves intra-modality structure. Hence, we refor-mulate the problem as encouraging zu to retain the structural information of the full latent space. Specifically, since the latent embeddings already reside in a low-dimensional space, we apply an isometric loss [47] that minimizes the discrepancy between the pairwise Euclidean distance matrices computed from z and from zu, for each modality, i.e., minimizing the Frobenius norm of the distance difference matrix 

Lpreserve = X

> m

X

> i,j ∈X(m)

h

|| μzu (xi) − μzu (xj )|| 2 − || μz (xi) − μz (xj )|| 2

i2

, (9) where μzu (x) is the posterior mean of variational approximation q(zu|x) and μz (x)is the posterior mean of total latent embeddings ( q(zu|x), q (zs|x, m )). And the total optimization goal becomes 

Ltotal = Lrecon + βLKL + λLalignment + γLpreserve . (10) We first update the discriminator by optimizing Ldiscriminator , then update VAE with respect to the total loss Ltotal in turn in each training mini-batch. 

Masked reconstruction loss for features mismatch and missing. Since differ-ent modalities are measured disparately, although it is possible to align features across modalities at the gene level, there still exists severe missing and non-overlapping fea-tures ubiquitous due to different sequencing coverages. For example, antibody-based protein profiling techniques (like CITE-seq) and in situ imaging-based spatial quan-tification methods (like smFISH) typically covers only a few hundred proteins due to the limited availability of antibody markers [3] or pre-defined fluorescence panel and optical crowding [4], while tens of thousands of genes can be measured in other sequencing-based omics. Restricting the analysis to the overlapping features across all modalities would lead to substantial information loss, whereas naively imput-ing unmeasured features with zeros would severely distort the data distribution. To address this, we introduce a binary mask b ∈ { 0, 1}G indicating feature availability that prevents gradients from back-propagating through unmeasured features in the reconstruction loss for each modality, and then scale by the proportion of available features to ensure that the reconstruction loss for each sample is on a comparable scale, i.e., 

Lrecon = − 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

(

G

PGg=1 bng GX

> g=1

bng log PZINB (xn; lnρng , r g , π ng ))

. (11) The masked loss strategy ensures that the model can fully utilize the available information while preserving the integrity of the original data distribution. 16 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Weighted sampling with severely unbalanced omics samples. Integrating heterogeneous omics faces significant challenges regarding sample size imbalance, espe-cially between large-scale single-cell datasets and single-slice spatial references. To mitigate this disparity, we employ inverse-frequency weighted sampling within each training batch to balance the modalities and stable the training loss. For validation, we maintain the original traversal method to preserve the data’s intrinsic distribution and ensure optimization stability. 

4.2 Prediction of missing omics using integrated latent embeddings 

The obtained integrated latent embeddings were utilized to interpolate missing data across omics modalities and hence enable cross-omics translation. Specifically, given the unified latent embeddings zsu ∈ Rn×du and ztu ∈ Rm×du derived from unpaired omics s (e.g., scRNA) and omics t (e.g., scATAC), we computed a coupling matrix 

W ∈ Rn×m capturing the correspondence between cells in the two datasets. This matrix enables cross-modal prediction, for instance, from s to t, according to ˆ xs→t =

Wxt. This coupling matrix W can be derived using various approaches, such as by solving an OT problem between the zsu and ztu distributions, or by applying kNN algorithm with either hard or soft assignments. 

4.3 Spatial location imputation of single-cell omics 

The scMRDR framework can be further extended to integrate spatial omics data (e.g., spatial transcriptomics) with other non-spatial single-cell modalities. This integration facilitates the imputation of spatial coordinates for the non-spatial single-cell data by leveraging the resulting unified latent embeddings. Specifically, given a spatial omics dataset s with known coordinates Ls ∈ Rn×dspatial and a non-spatial single-cell dataset t (containing m cells), we first compute their respective unified latent embeddings, zsu ∈ Rn×du and ztu ∈ Rm×du . An OT problem is then solved to find the coupling matrix Γ ∈ Rm×n that minimizes the transport cost between the two latent distributions Γ∗ = arg min 

> Γ

Z

C(ztu, zsu)dΓ( ztu, zsu). (12) Subsequently, the spatial locations for the cells in dataset t (Lt ∈ Rm×dspatial ) are imputed via barycentric projection. This is achieved by projecting the known spa-tial coordinates Ls onto dataset t using the optimal coupling matrix Γ ∗, i.e., the barycentric projection 

Ltj =

Pni=1 Γ∗

> ji

Lsi

Pni=1 Γ∗

> ji

. (13) Spatial imputation will alleviate the limitations of traditional spatial transcrip-tomics methods in terms of resolution (e.g., Visium) or sequencing coverage (e.g., MERFISH), enabling quantification of the spatial heterogeneity of a larger number of genes at single-cell resolution within complex regularization process, for example, the detection of spatial highly variable genes (SVGs). 17 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4.4 Test on the effect of DNA methylation on gene expression with spatial generalized additive mixed-effect model 

Spatial location imputation of scRNA and snmC-seq. We used scMRDR to integrate 10x Visium data of the mouse brain cortex with spatial location measure-ments and scRNA and snmC-seq data without spatial coordinate information. We used normalized z-scores of mRNA expression and DNA methylation levels as input to align RNA and methylation features. Using the unified embedding obtained from the integration, we interpolated the spatial location information of scRNA and snmC-seq cells. 

Spatial Data Alignment. Next, to create spatially comparable units, we per-formed a data aggregation step. For both the RNA and methylation datasets independently, we grouped spots that shared the same anatomical layer and occupied a similar spatial location (defined by rounding coordinates to a precision of two decimal places). The gene profiles within each of these unique spatial-anatomical groups were then averaged, creating a new, aggregated “pseudo-spot” dataset for each modality. Finally, we aligned these aggregated datasets. The matching was performed strictly within each anatomical layer. For every aggregated RNA pseudo-spot, we identified its single nearest-neighboring aggregated methylation pseudo-spot based on Euclidean distance. This process generated the final, one-to-one matched dataset of mRNA expression and DNA methylation profiles used for all downstream analyses. 

Statistical Analysis with SGAMM. To assess the relationship between gene body DNA methylation status and corresponding mRNA expression level while cor-recting for spatial confounding and hierarchical cell-type structure, we implemented a Spatial Generalized Additive Mixed-effect Model (SGAMM) for each gene. For each gene, we modeled log-normalized expression ( Ei) as a function of normalized methyla-tion ratio ( Mi, computed by averaging mCG and mCH level across the gene body, i.e., TSS to TES) for each cell i, located at spatial coordinates zi = ( xi, y i) and belonging to a specific cell type ki.To account for spatial autocorrelation, we introduce a zero-mean Gaussian Process, 

s(z) ∼ GP (0 , K) to model the spatial effect at cell coordinates zi = ( xi, y i). The Gaussian Process is characterized by a covariance function K(zi, zj ), which defines the spatial covariance between any two cells i and j as a function of their locations. This term flexibly captures continuous, spatially-structured variation that is not accounted for by other model components. We also incorporate the cell-type-specific effect and consider two variants. 

• Model 1 (SGAM): We implement a Spatial Generalized Additive Model (SGAM) using the mgcv package in R by introducing an interaction term and treating cell type as fixed effects. 

Ei = β0 + β1Mi + X

> k

γkIW =k + X

> j

δj IW =kMi + s(zi) + ϵi. (14) 18 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

• Model 2 (SGAMM): We implement Spatial Generative Additive Mixed-effect Models (SGAMM) using the gamm4 package in R and use random effects b0,W i and b1,W i

to capture deviations specific to the cell type Wi, which are assumed to follow a zero-mean multivariate normal distribution ( b0,W i , b 1,W i ) ∼ N (0, Σ). 

Ei = β0 + β1Mi + b0,W i + b1,W i Mi + s(zi) + ϵi. (15) Finally, ϵi ∼ N (0 , σ 2) is the independent, non-spatial residual error term. Statistical significance of the methylation association ( β1) was assessed via t-statistics from the fitted model. 

4.5 Experiments setting and evaluation metrics 

We compared to existing methods through a series of experiments on real-world datasets, beginning with standard benchmarks and then scaling up to more complex single-cell and multi-omics scenarios, and evaluate in terms of cell-type clustering, modality integration, and batch removal. Cell-type labels in different omics has been harmonized in evaluation. It should be emphasized that we did not use cell-type labels during training. UMAP visualizations are presented for qualitative comparison. For quantitative evaluation, the following commonly used metrics are included: F1 isolated label scores, k-means NMI, k-means ARI, cell-type Silhouette, and cell-type sepa-ration LISI (cLISI) to evaluate the performance in cell type conservation, modality Silhouette, modality integration LISI (iLISI-modality), kBET, Principal Component Regression (PCR) R2, and graph connectivity to evaluate the performance in modality integration, as well as batch Silhouette, batch integration LISI (iLISI-batch), kBET, and PCR R2 to evaluate the performance in batch effect correction [22, 48]. We eval-uate and visualize all the above metrics based on the package scib-metrics [22]. The overall score is calculated as a weighted average of all metrics on bio-conservation (40% weights), modality integration (30% weights), and batch correction (30% weights). In our experiments, we set the batch size to 128, the maximum epoch number to 200, and the dimensions of both the shared latent component ( du) and modality-specific component ( ds) to 20. Parameters are optimized via Adam optimizer and the learning rate is started from 0.001 with a cosine annealing scheduler. 10% of the data was used as a validation set for early stopping during training based on the total loss on validation set. For scATAC-seq data, peak count signals are converted to gene-level gene activity scores using EpiScanpy. For datasets integrating two modalities, we select highly variable genes that are measured in both scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq (based on gene activity scores) as input features, and do not apply masked loss. For tri-modal integration, we use highly variable genes from scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq, as well as all genes with nonzero measurements in scProtein as input features, and apply masked loss according to the available gene list associated with each modality. Detailed hyperparamters setting is shown in Supplementary Table S1. 

Supplementary information. Supplementary materials are available online. 

Acknowledgements. This work is supported by Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. 19 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Declarations 

• Conflict of interest: No conflict of interest. 

• Ethics approval and consent to participate: Not applicable. 

• Consent for publication: Not applicable. 

• Data availability: Benchmark single-cell data used are available at https://scglue.readthedocs.io/en/latest/data.html and https://cellxgene. cziscience.com/collections/ae1420fe-6630-46ed-8b3d-cc6056a66467, paired 10x multiome data are available at https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets, mouse primary motor cortex merFISH omics data are available at https: //cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/9132fae8-bdfe-480f-9e45-45bc77f320b3, mouse frontal cortex data are available at https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/ 1smPbTfkkd Pvk0hXzIZrXk55aEbnXPVl?usp=sharing, 10x visum data are available at https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/spatial vignette, mouse methyla-tion data are available at https://brainome.ucsd.edu/annoj/brain single nuclei/, the multi-species scRNA data are available at https://assets.nemoarchive.org/ dat-zkgd0it. 

• Code availability: The codes are available at https://github.com/sjl-sjtu/scMRDR. 

## References 

[1] Sun, J., Liang, C., Wei, R., Zheng, P., Bai, L., Ouyang, W., Yan, H., Ye, P.: scmrdr: A scalable and flexible framework for unpaired single-cell multi-omics data integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24987 (2025) [2] Baysoy, A., Bai, Z., Satija, R., Fan, R.: The technological landscape and applica-tions of single-cell multi-omics. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 24 (10), 695–713 (2023) [3] Bennett, H.M., Stephenson, W., Rose, C.M., Darmanis, S.: Single-cell proteomics enabled by next-generation sequencing or mass spectrometry. Nature Methods 

20 (3), 363–374 (2023) [4] Moses, L., Pachter, L.: Museum of spatial transcriptomics. Nature methods 19 (5), 534–546 (2022) [5] Tran, H.T.N., Ang, K.S., Chevrier, M., Zhang, X., Lee, N.Y.S., Goh, M., Chen, J.: A benchmark of batch-effect correction methods for single-cell rna sequencing data. Genome Biology 21 , 1–32 (2020) [6] Argelaguet, R., Arnol, D., Bredikhin, D., Deloro, Y., Velten, B., Marioni, J.C., Stegle, O.: MOFA+: a statistical framework for comprehensive integration of multi-modal single-cell data. Genome Biology 21 , 1–17 (2020) [7] Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M.B., Jordan, M.I., Yosef, N.: Deep generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nature Methods 15 (12), 1053–1058 20 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(2018) [8] Ashuach, T., Gabitto, M.I., Koodli, R.V., Saldi, G.-A., Jordan, M.I., Yosef, N.: Multivi: deep generative model for the integration of multimodal data. Nature Methods 20 (8), 1222–1231 (2023) [9] Cao, K., Gong, Q., Hong, Y., Wan, L.: A unified computational framework for single-cell data integration with optimal transport. Nature Communications 

13 (1), 7419 (2022) [10] Cao, Z.-J., Gao, G.: Multi-omics single-cell data integration and regulatory infer-ence with graph-linked embedding. Nature Biotechnology 40 (10), 1458–1466 (2022) [11] Cohen Kalafut, N., Huang, X., Wang, D.: Joint variational autoencoders for mul-timodal imputation and embedding. Nature Machine Intelligence 5(6), 631–642 (2023) [12] Cao, K., Bai, X., Hong, Y., Wan, L.: Unsupervised topological alignment for single-cell multi-omics integration. Bioinformatics 36 (Supplement 1), 48–56 (2020) [13] Zhou, Y., Fang, Q., Feng, Y.: CMOT: Cross-modal mixup via optimal transport for speech translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14635 (2023) [14] Demetci, P., Santorella, R., Sandstede, B., Noble, W.S., Singh, R.: SCOT: single-cell multi-omics alignment with optimal transport. Journal of Computational Biology 29 (1), 3–18 (2022) [15] Cao, K., Hong, Y., Wan, L.: Manifold alignment for heterogeneous single-cell multi-omics data integration using Pamona. Bioinformatics 38 (1), 211–219 (2022) [16] Hao, Y., Stuart, T., Kowalski, M.H., Choudhary, S., Hoffman, P., Hartman, A., Srivastava, A., Molla, G., Madad, S., Fernandez-Granda, C., et al. : Dictio-nary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-cell analysis. Nature Biotechnology 42 (2), 293–304 (2024) [17] Korsunsky, I., Millard, N., Fan, J., Slowikowski, K., Zhang, F., Wei, K., Baglaenko, Y., Brenner, M., Loh, P.-r., Raychaudhuri, S.: Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with harmony. Nature Methods 16 (12), 1289–1296 (2019) [18] Chen, S., Zhu, B., Huang, S., Hickey, J.W., Lin, K.Z., Snyder, M., Greenleaf, W.J., Nolan, G.P., Zhang, N.R., Ma, Z.: Integration of spatial and single-cell data across modalities with weakly linked features. Nature Biotechnology 42 (7), 1096–1106 (2024) 21 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[19] Chen, H., Ryu, J., Vinyard, M.E., Lerer, A., Pinello, L.: Simba: single-cell embedding along with features. Nature Methods 21 (6), 1003–1013 (2024) [20] Muto, Y., Wilson, P.C., Ledru, N., Wu, H., Dimke, H., Waikar, S.S., Humphreys, B.D.: Single cell transcriptional and chromatin accessibility profiling redefine cel-lular heterogeneity in the adult human kidney. Nature Communications 12 (1), 2190 (2021) [21] Danese, A., Richter, M.L., Chaichoompu, K., Fischer, D.S., Theis, F.J., Colom´ e-Tatch´ e, M.: EpiScanpy: integrated single-cell epigenomic analysis. Nature Com-munications 12 (1), 5228 (2021) [22] Luecken, M.D., B¨ uttner, M., Chaichoompu, K., Danese, A., Interlandi, M., M¨ uller, M.F., Strobl, D.C., Zappia, L., Dugas, M., Colom´ e-Tatch´ e, M., et al. : Benchmarking atlas-level data integration in single-cell genomics. Nature Methods 19 (1), 41–50 (2022) [23] Yao, Z., Liu, H., Xie, F., Fischer, S., Adkins, R.S., Aldridge, A.I., Ament, S.A., Bartlett, A., Behrens, M.M., Berge, K., et al. : A transcriptomic and epigenomic cell atlas of the mouse primary motor cortex. Nature 598 (7879), 103–110 (2021) [24] Luecken, M.D., Burkhardt, D.B., Cannoodt, R., Lance, C., Agrawal, A., Aliee, H., Chen, A.T., Deconinck, L., Detweiler, A.M., Granados, A.A., et al. : A sandbox for prediction and integration of DNA, RNA, and proteins in single cells. In: Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) (2021) [25] Zhang, M., Eichhorn, S.W., Zingg, B., Yao, Z., Cotter, K., Zeng, H., Dong, H., Zhuang, X.: Spatially resolved cell atlas of the mouse primary motor cortex by merfish. Nature 598 (7879), 137–143 (2021) [26] Zhu, J., Sun, S., Zhou, X.: Spark-x: non-parametric modeling enables scalable and robust detection of spatial expression patterns for large spatial transcriptomic studies. Genome biology 22 (1), 184 (2021) [27] Takemoto, M., Hattori, Y., Zhao, H., Sato, H., Tamada, A., Sasaki, S., Nakajima, K., Yamamoto, N.: Laminar and areal expression of unc5d and its role in cortical cell survival. Cerebral Cortex 21 (8), 1925–1934 (2011) [28] Galazo, M.J., Emsley, J.G., Macklis, J.D.: Corticothalamic projection neu-ron development beyond subtype specification: Fog2 and intersectional controls regulate intraclass neuronal diversity. Neuron 91 (1), 90–106 (2016) [29] Luo, C., Keown, C.L., Kurihara, L., Zhou, J., He, Y., Li, J., Castanon, R., Lucero, J., Nery, J.R., Sandoval, J.P., et al. : Single-cell methylomes identify neuronal subtypes and regulatory elements in mammalian cortex. Science 357 (6351), 600– 604 (2017) 22 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[30] Yang, P., Jin, K., Yao, Y., Jin, L., Shao, X., Li, C., Lu, X., Fan, X.: Spatial integration of multi-omics single-cell data with simo. Nature Communications 

16 (1), 1265 (2025) [31] Liu, H., Zhou, J., Tian, W., Luo, C., Bartlett, A., Aldridge, A., Lucero, J., Osteen, J.K., Nery, J.R., Chen, H., et al. : Dna methylation atlas of the mouse brain at single-cell resolution. Nature 598 (7879), 120–128 (2021) [32] Lister, R., Mukamel, E.A., Nery, J.R., Urich, M., Puddifoot, C.A., Johnson, N.D., Lucero, J., Huang, Y., Dwork, A.J., Schultz, M.D., et al. : Global epige-nomic reconfiguration during mammalian brain development. Science 341 (6146), 1237905 (2013) [33] Ma, S., Skarica, M., Li, Q., Xu, C., Risgaard, R.D., Tebbenkamp, A.T., Mato-Blanco, X., Kovner, R., Krsnik, ˇZ., Martin, X., et al. : Molecular and cellular evolution of the primate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Science 377 (6614), 7257 (2022) [34] Jeong, Y., Ronen, J., Kopp, W., Lutsik, P., Akalin, A.: scmaui: a widely applicable deep learning framework for single-cell multiomics integration in the presence of batch effects and missing data. BMC Bioinformatics 25 (1), 257 (2024) [35] Wang, L., Nie, R., Miao, X., Cai, Y., Wang, A., Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Cai, J.: Inclust+: the deep generative framework with mask modules for multimodal data integration, imputation, and cross-modal generation. BMC Bioinformatics 25 (1), 41 (2024) [36] Wang, F.-a., He, R., Liu, J., Li, Y.: sctfbridge: A disentangled deep generative model informed by tf-motif binding for gene regulation inference in single-cell multi-omics. bioRxiv, 2025–01 (2025) [37] Sun, J., Dong, Q., Wei, J., Gao, Y., Yu, Z., Hu, X., Zhang, Y.: ti-scmr: trajectory-inference-based dynamic single-cell mendelian randomization identifies causal genes underlying phenotypic differences. NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics 7(3), 082 (2025) [38] Jin, S., Plikus, M.V., Nie, Q.: Cellchat for systematic analysis of cell–cell com-munication from single-cell transcriptomics. Nature protocols 20 (1), 180–219 (2025) [39] Dimitrov, D., Schrod, S., Rohbeck, M., Stegle, O.: Interpretation, extrapolation and perturbation of single cells. Nature Reviews Genetics, 1–22 (2026) [40] Sun, J., Stojanov, P., Zhang, K.: Single-cell disentangled representations for perturbation modeling and treatment effect estimation. bioRxiv, 2025–11 (2025) 23 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[41] Khemakhem, I., Kingma, D., Monti, R., Hyvarinen, A.: Variational autoen-coders and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2207–2217 (2020). PMLR [42] Risso, D., Perraudeau, F., Gribkova, S., Dudoit, S., Vert, J.-P.: A general and flexible method for signal extraction from single-cell RNA-seq data. Nature Communications 9(1), 284 (2018) [43] Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X., Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S., Lerchner, A.: beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2017) [44] Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-encoding variational bayes. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2014) [45] Goodfellow, I.J., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y.: Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (2014) [46] Dincer, A.B., Janizek, J.D., Lee, S.-I.: Adversarial deconfounding autoencoder for learning robust gene expression embeddings. Bioinformatics 36 (Supplement 2), 573–582 (2020) [47] Tenenbaum, J.B., Silva, V.d., Langford, J.C.: A global geometric framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Science 290 (5500), 2319–2323 (2000) [48] Xiao, C., Chen, Y., Meng, Q., Wei, L., Zhang, X.: Benchmarking multi-omics integration algorithms across single-cell RNA and ATAC data. Briefings in Bioinformatics 25 (2), 095 (2024) 24 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Scalable integration and prediction of unpaired single-cell and spatial multi-omics via regularized disentanglement Supplementary Materials 

Supplementary Notes SN1 Benchmark experiments settings and evaluation metrics Experiments settings. 

The species, tissues, sample sizes, modalities, and references (the original sources) of the single-cell datasets used in the experiments are shown in Supplementary Table S1. In our experiments, we set the batch size to 128, the epoch number to 200, and the dimensions of both the shared latent component ( 𝑑 ௨) and modality-specific component ( 𝑑 ௦) to 20. Parameters are optimized via Adam optimizer and the learning rate is started from 0.001 with a cosine annealing scheduler. Other hyperparameter settings are summarized in Table Supplementary Table S1. 10% of the data was used as a validation set for early stopping during training based on the total loss on validation set. For scATAC-seq data, peak count signals are converted to gene-level gene activity scores using EpiScanpy. For datasets integrating two modalities, we select highly variable genes that are measured in both scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq (based on gene activity scores) as input features, and do not apply masked loss. For tri-modal integration, we use highly variable genes from scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq, as well as all genes with nonzero measurements in scProtein as input features, and apply masked loss according to the available gene list associated with each modality. Competing methods are used with their respective default settings. Specifically, Seurat, Harmony, and scVI use gene activity scores for scATAC-seq, while all other methods operate on the original peak counts. We run all empirical experiments on a single NVIDIA RTX 4080 GPU. The runtime of our method for 200 epochs is also reported in Supplementary Table S1. 

Evaluation metrics. 

 F1 isolated label scores. The optimal F1 score by optimizing the cluster assignment of the isolated label using the F1 score across Louvain clustering (resolutions 0.1 –2, step 0.1). The metric is averaged across all isolated cell-type labels. 

 Silhouette scores. The global silhouette width measures (ASW) between isolated and non-isolated labels on the PCA embedding, scaled to [0, 1]. ASW measures how similar a data point is to its own cluster compared to other clusters, with higher ASW indicating 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

more compact and well-separated clusters. For the bio-conservation, ASW was computed and averaged across cell identity labels; while for modality or batch integration, ASW was computed and averaged across batch or modality labels, and then subtracted from 1 to ensure higher scores indicate better integration. 

 Kmeans NMI. Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) measures the similarity between clustering results and known labels, accounting for label permutations. We compute NMI between KMeans clusters and ground truth labels, with scores ranging from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (perfect match). 

 Kmeans ARI. Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) evaluates clustering accuracy by considering both agreements and disagreements between predicted and true labels, adjusted for chance. We compare KMeans clusters with ground truth labels, where 0 indicates random labeling and 1 indicates perfect agreement. 

 Graph LISI. Graph LISI is an extension of the original LISI metric that is computed from neighborhood lists per node from integrated kNN graphs. Instead of relying on a fixed number of nearest neighbors, Graph LISI computes shortest-path distances on the integrated graph to consistently define neighborhoods for each cell, providing a stable diversity score even when the underlying graph has variable connectivity. The resulting scores are rescaled to a 0 –1 range, where higher values indicate better batch or modality integration (iLISI) or better cell-type separation (cLISI). 

 PCR. Principal Component Regression (PCR) is used to quantify batch effects by assessing how much variance in the data can be attributed to batch variables or modality differences, which is computed by multiplying the variance explained by each principal component (PC) with the 𝑅 ଶ value from regressing the batch on that PC and then summing over all PCs. 

 kBET. k-nearest neighbor Batch Effect Test (kBET) assesses data mixing by checking whether the local batch label distribution in each cell ’s neighborhood matches the global distribution. It reports a rejection rate across tested neighborhoods, where a lower rate indicates better batch mixing. 

 Graph connectivity. Graph connectivity, ranging from 0 to 1, measures how well cells of the same identity are connected within the integrated kNN graph. For each cell type, it computes the fraction of cells in the largest connected component of that type's subgraph. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Tables 

Supplementary Table S1 Experiments details 

Dataset Species Tissue Modality Sample size 

β γ λ Notes Tim e

small-size two-omics integration 

Human Kidney scRNA-seq 19,985 2 5 5 ~20 min scATAC-seq 24,205 

large-scale two-omics integration 

Mouse Primary motor cortex scRNA-seq 69,727 2 5 5 ~2h scATAC-seq 54,844 

triple-omics integration 

Human Bone marrow scRNA-seq 30,486 5 10 10 Masked loss applied ~50 min scATAC-seq 10,330 scProtein (CITE-seq) 18,052 

paired 10x multiome data 

Human PBMC scRNA-seq 9,631 2 5 10 Modeling log-normalized RNA and gene activity score <10mi nscATAC-seq 9,631 

scRNA+scA TAC+merF ISH 

Mouse Primary motor cortex scRNA-seq 69,727 5 10 30 Masked loss applied ~2h scATAC-seq 54,844 ST (merFISH, mouse1_sli ce170) 6,319 

scRNA+sn mC+Visium 

Mouse Cerebral cortex scRNA-seq 55,803 5 20 20 Modeling z-scores (negative z-score for methylation since there’s ~50mi nsnmC-seq (mCG+mC H) 3,377 ST (10x 1,075 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Visium) typically negative correlation), weighted sampling in training batches. 

Cross-species 

Human Primary motor cortex scRNA 172,12 02 5 5 Gene names of homologous genes have been harmonized. ~3h Chimpa nzee 158,09 9Marmo set 149,46 7Macaq ue 131,03 2

Supplementary Table S2 Performance in ablation studies and sensitivity analysis, where unscaled scIB aggregate scores are reported. 

β γ λ Total Score Batch-correct Bio-conserve Modal-integrate Notes 

2 5 5 0.66 0.52 0.74 0.70 2 7 5 0.65 0.54 0.69 0.72 2 5 3 0.65 0.55 0.69 0.71 2 2 2 0.65 0.50 0.72 0.70 2 5 7 0.65 0.49 0.70 0.73 2 3 5 0.65 0.47 0.71 0.74 2 1 5 0.64 0.49 0.68 0.75 3 5 5 0.64 0.48 0.71 0.71 4 5 5 0.64 0.47 0.71 0.72 2 10 5 0.64 0.52 0.68 0.71 1 5 5 0.62 0.50 0.67 0.68 𝛽 = 1

2 5 0 0.61 0.53 0.69 0.60 𝜆 = 0

2 0 5 0.61 0.51 0.60 0.72 𝛾 = 0

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

1 0 0 0.59 0.48 0.63 0.66 Baseline 

Supplementary Table S3 Ablation study in triple-omics data, where unscaled scIB aggregate scores are reported. 

Overall Score Batch Correct Bio Conserve Modal Integrate ours 0.58 0.39 0.69 0.61 

𝜷 = 𝟏 0.51 0.39 0.58 0.52 

𝝀 = 𝟎 0.48 0.32 0.60 0.49 

𝜸 = 𝟎 0.53 0.40 0.58 0.58 

w/o truncated loss 0.44 0.33 0.58 0.37 

Supplementary Figures 

Supplementary Fig. S1 Details on the unscaled scIB evaluation metrics in two-omics integration task (a), large-scale two-omics integration task (b), and triple-omics integration task (c). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Fig. S2 UMAP visualization of the unified embeddings obtained by different methods in small-scale two-omics data integration task. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S3 UMAP visualization of the unified embeddings obtained by different methods in large-scale two-omics data integration task. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S4 UMAP visualization of the unified embeddings obtained by different methods in triple-omics data integration task. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S5 Correlation between the true and predicted mean RNA expressions / ATAC activity scores of different genes within all cells and cells from the top 5 cell types with the highest quant. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S6 Spatial visualization of mouse primary motor cortex scRNA data, where the cell type and subtype labels are provided by the original study, and the spatial locations are imputed by scMRDR. Two OT variants - Sinkhorn (a) and EMD (b) algorithms -are used in imputing spatial locations. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S7 Spatial visualization of mouse primary motor cortex scATAC data, where the cell type and subtype labels are provided by the original study, and the spatial locations are imputed by scMRDR. Two OT variants - Sinkhorn (a) and EMD (b) algorithms -are used in imputing spatial locations. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S8 Top 20 SVGs detected via SPARKX on the original merFISH ST data on mouse primary motor cortex. Supplementary Fig. S9 Top 20 SVGs detected via SPARKX on the scRNA data with imputed spatial locations on mouse primary motor cortex. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S10 Top 20 SVGs detected via SPARKX on the gene activity score calculated from scATAC data with imputed spatial locations on mouse primary motor cortex. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Fig. S11 Gene methylation’s effects on expression tested via Spatial Generalized Additive Model (SGAM) accounting for spatial autocorrelation and cell-type heterogeneity, where cell types are incorporated as a fixed effect. Volcano plots show effect size (beta) and BH-adjusted FDR for mCG (a) and mCH (b) sites. Manhattan plots show the effect significance for mCG (c) and mCH (d), where the red dashed line indicates the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

significance threshold 1e-5 (since thousands of genes are included). Supplementary Fig. S12 Gene methylation’s effects on expression tested via Spatial Generalized Additive Mixed Model (SGAMM) accounting for spatial autocorrelation and cell-type heterogeneity, where cell types are incorporated as a random effect. Volcano plots show effect size (beta) and BH-adjusted FDR for mCG (a) and mCH (b) sites. Manhattan 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.689803 doi: bioRxiv preprint

plots show the effect significance for mCG (c) and mCH (d), where the red dashed line indicates the significance threshold 1e-5 (since thousands of genes are included). Supplementary Fig. S13 UMAP visualization of cross-species scRNA integration of primary motor cortex cells, where cells are colored by their subclass labels (a), species (b), and batch information (c).